Organic Fruit and Vegetables from theTropics
Market, Certification and Production Information for Producers and
International Trading Companies
United Nations
UnitedNationsConferenceonTrade&Development
Organic Fruit and Vegetables
from the Tropics
Market, Certification and Production Information for Producers and
International Trading Companies
United Nations
New York and Geneva, 2003
Note
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates
a reference to a United Nations document.
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory,
city or area, or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
Material in this publication may be freely quoted or reprinted, but full acknowledgement is requested.
A copy of the publication containing the quotation or reprint should be sent to the UNCTAD secretariat at:
Palais des Nations, CH-1211 Geneva 10, Switzerland.
Copyright © United Nations, 2003
UNCTAD/DITC/COM/2003/2
Contents
Acknowledgements
Forewords
Contents
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
FOREWORDS
Part A: 
Production and Basic Principles 
of Organic Agriculture
I. General Aspects of Organic Farming in the Tropics and Subtropics
1.1. Philosophy and principles of organic agriculture Page 2
1.1.1. Definition and principles
1.1.2. Distinction from other farming systems
1.1.3. Why organic agriculture?
1.1.4. Development of organic agriculture
1.2. Soil management and soil nutrition Page 8
1.2.1. The soil – A living organism
1.2.2. Soil cultivation and tillage
1.2.3. Green manures and cover crops
1.2.4. Mulching
1.2.5. Associating crops and crop rotation
1.2.6. Soil and plant nutrition
1.2.7. Nutrient recycling on the farm
1.2.8. Composting
1.3. Pest and disease management Page 23
1.3.1. Plant health and natural defense
1.3.2. Preventive measures
1.3.3. Curative crop protection methods
1.4. Weed management Page 28
1.5. Seeds and planting material Page 30
1.5.1. Conservation varieties and on-farm propagation
1.5.2. What do the standards say ?
1.5.3. www.organicXseeds.com – more than 3500 products online
1.5.4. Organic plant breeding techniques
C o n t e n t s
iv
1.6. Management of semi-natural habitats Page 32
1.7. Livestock husbandry Page 34
1.7.1. Keeping animals
1.7.2. Feeding animals
1.7.3. Animal health
1.7.4. Breeding in organic animal husbandry
1.8. Water conservation and irrigation Page 39
1.9. Agroforestry Page 41
1.10. Conversion to organic farming Page 45
1.10.1. The conversion process
1.10.2. Ready for conversion ?
1.10.3. Conversion planning
1.11. The Economic performance of organic farms Page 48
1.11.1. Costs and returns
1.11.2. Reducing expenses
1.11.3. Ways to increase returns
Part B: 
Organic Cultivation of Fruits 
and Vegetables 
II. Organic fruits
2.1. Citrus Page 54
2.1.1 Agro-Ecological requirements and site selection
2.1.2 Establishing an organic citrus orchard
2.1.3 Soil management
2.1.4 Tree Nutrition and fertilization
2.1.5 Weed control
2.1.6 Water management and irrigation
2.1.7 Freeze protection
2.1.8 Pruning
2.1.9 Pest and disease management
2.1.10 Harvesting and post harvest handling
C o n t e n t s
v
2.2. Guava Page 68
2.2.1. Agro-Ecological requirement and site selection
2.2.2. Establishing an organic guava orchard
2.2.3. Soil and weed management
2.2.4. Tree nutrition and fertilization
2.2.5. Water management and irrigation
2.2.6. Freeze protection
2.2.7. Pruning and fruit thinning
2.2.8. Pest and disease management
2.2.9. Harvesting and post harvest handling
2.3. Lychee Page 75
2.3.1. Ecological requirements 
2.3.2. Establishing an organic lychee orchard
2.3.3. Soil and weed management
2.3.4. Soil nutrition and fertilization
2.3.5. Pruning
2.3.6. Water management and irrigation
2.3.7. Pest and disease management
2.3.8. Harvesting and post harvest handling
2.4. Avocado Page 84
2.4.1. Agro-Ecological requirements and site selection
2.4.2. Establishing an organic avocado orchard
2.4.3. Soil and weed management
2.4.4. Tree nutrition and fertilization
2.4.5. Water management and irrigation
2.4.6. Freeze protection
2.4.7. Pruning
2.4.8. Pest and disease management
2.4.9. Harvesting and post harvest handling
2.5. Coconut Page 93
2.5.1. Ecological requirements 
2.5.2. Soil and weed management
2.5.3. Organic Coconut Palm Production Systems
2.5.4. Soil nutrition and organic fertilization
2.5.5. Pest and disease management
2.5.6. Harvesting and post harvest handling
C o n t e n t s
vi
2.6. Bananas Page 98
2.6.1. Botany
2.6.2. Varieties and countries of origin
2.6.3. Uses and contents
2.6.4. Site requirements
2.6.5. Seeds and seedlings
2.6.6. Methods of planting
2.6.7. Diversification strategies
2.6.8. Nutrients and organic fertilization management
2.6.9. Biological methods of plant protection
2.6.10. Monitoring and maintenance
2.6.11. Harvesting and post-harvest treatment
2.6.12. Product specifications and quality standards 
2.7. Mango Page 109
2.7.1. Botany
2.7.2. Varieties and countries of origin
2.7.3. Uses and contents
2.7.4. Aspects of plant cultivation
2.7.5. Planting methods
2.7.6. Diversification strategies
2.7.7. Nutrients and organic fertilization management
2.7.8. Biological methods of plant protection
2.7.9. Crop cultivation and maintenance
2.7.10. Harvesting and post-harvest treatment
2.7.11. Product specifications and quality standards
2.8. Pineapple Page 119
2.8.1.  Botany
2.8.2. Varieties and countries of origin
2.8.3. Uses and contents
2.8.4. Aspects of plant cultivation
2.8.5. Planting methods and cultivation systems
2.8.6. Nutrients and organic fertilization management
2.8.7. Biological methods of plant protection
2.8.8. Crop cultivation and maintenance 
2.8.9. Harvesting and post-harvest treatment
2.8.10. Product specifications and quality standards
C o n t e n t s
vii
2.9. Dates Page 128
2.9.1. Botany
2.9.2. Varieties and countries of origin
2.9.3. Uses and contents
2.9.4. Aspects of plant cultivation
2.9.5. Methods of planting
2.9.6. Diversification strategies
2.9.7. Nutrients and organic fertilization management
2.9.8. Biological methods of plant protection
2.9.9. Crop monitoring and maintenance
2.9.10. Harvesting and post-harvest treatment
2.9.11. Product specifications and quality standards
2.10. Pepper Page 139
2.10.1. Botany
2.10.2. Varieties and countries of origin
2.10.3. Uses and contents
2.10.4. Aspects of plant cultivation
2.10.5. Planting methods
2.10.6. Diversification strategies
2.10.7. Nutrients and organic fertilization management
2.10.8. Biological methods of plant protection
2.10.9. Crop monitoring and maintenance
2.10.10. Harvesting and post-harvest treatment
2.10.11. Product specifications and quality standards
2.11. Different possible Processing Methods for Fruits Page 147
2.11.1. Dried Fruits
2.11.2. Fruit Marmalade
2.11.3. Canned Fruits
2.11.4. Fruit pulp
2.11.5. Transport Packaging
III. Organic Vegetables
3.1. Beans Page 165
3.1.1. Ecological requirements
3.1.2. Planting systems and soil management
3.1.3. Pest  and disease management
3.1.4. Weed management
3.1.5. Harvesting and Post Harvest Handling
C o n t e n t s
viii
3.2. Tomato Page 170
3.2.1. Ecological requirements
3.2.2. Organic tomato production systems
3.2.3. Soil Nutrition and organic fertilization
3.2.4. Irrigation
3.2.5. Pest and disease management
3.2.6. Weed management
3.2.7. Harvesting and post harvest handling
3.3. Cabbage Page 176
3.3.1. Ecological requirements
3.3.2. Organic Cabbage production systems
3.3.3. Soil Nutrition and organic fertilization
3.3.4. Pest and disease management
3.3.5. Harvesting and post harvest handling
3.4. Asparagus Page 180
3.4.1. Ecological requirements
3.4.2. Organic asparagus production systems
3.4.3. Soil Nutrition and organic fertilization
3.4.4. Irrigation
3.4.5. Pest and disease management
3.4.6. Weed management
3.4.7. Harvesting and post harvest handling
3.5. Carrot Page 185
3.5.1. Ecological requirements
3.5.2. Organic carrot production systems
3.5.3. Soil Nutrition and irrigation
3.5.4. Pest and disease management
3.5.5. Weed management
3.5.6. Harvesting and post harvest handling
3.6. Cucumber Page 189
3.6.1. Ecological requirements
3.6.2. Organic cucumber Production Systems
3.6.3. Soil nutrition and irrigation
3.6.4. Pest and disease management
3.6.5. Weed management
3.6.6. Harvesting and post harvest handling
C o n t e n t s
ix
3.7. Aubergine Page 192
3.7.1. Ecological requirements
3.7.2. Organic aubergine production systems
3.7.3. Soil Nutrition and irrigation
3.7.4. Pest and disease management
3.7.5. Weed management
3.7.6. Harvesting and post harvest handling
3.8. Lettuce Page 196
3.8.1. Ecological requirements
3.8.2. Organic lettuce production systems
3.8.3. Soil Nutrition and irrigation
3.8.4. Pest and disease management
3.8.5. Weed management
3.8.6. Harvesting and post harvest handling
3.9. Onions Page 200
3.9.1. Ecological requirements
3.9.2. Organic onion Production Systems
3.9.3. Soil Nutrition and irrigation
3.9.4. Pest and disease management
3.9.5. Weed management
3.9.6. Harvesting and post harvest handling
3.10. Radish Page 203
3.10.1. Ecological requirements
3.10.2. Organic Radish production systems
3.10.3. Soil Nutrition and irrigation
3.10.4. Pest and disease management
3.10.5. Weed management
3.10.6. Harvesting and post harvest handling
3.11. Spinach Page 206
3.11.1. Ecological requirements
3.11.2. Organic Spinach production systems
3.11.3. Soil Nutrition and irrigation
3.11.4. Pest and disease management
3.11.5. Weed management
3.11.6. Harvesting and post harvest handling
C o n t e n t s
x
3.12. Sweet corn Page 210
3.12.1. Ecological requirements
3.12.2. Organic sweet corn Production Systems
3.12.3. Soil Nutrition and irrigation
3.12.4. Pest and disease management
3.12.5. Weed management
3.12.6. Harvesting and post harvest handling
3.13. Water Melon Page 213
3.13.1. Ecological requirements
3.13.2. Organic Melon Production System
3.13.3. irrigation
3.13.4. Pest and disease management
3.13.5. Weed management
3.13.6. Harvesting and post harvest handling
Part C: 
Global Market Perspectives 
for Developing Countries
IV. Organic Markets by regions
4.1. North America Page 220
4.1.1. United States
4.1.2. Canada
4.2. Europe Page 223
4.2.1. Austria
4.2.2. France
4.2.3. Germany
4.2.4. Italy
4.2.5. Switzerland
4.2.6. The Netherlands
4.2.7. United Kingdom
4.3. Asia Page 232
4.3.1. Japan
4.3.2. Singapore
C o n t e n t s
xi
4.4. Organic markets in developing countries Page 235
Part D:
Standards 
and Regulations
V. Requirements and Conditions Relating to Organic Trade
5.1. General trade constraints, customs and tax regulations Page 238
5.2. Importing goods into the EU, USA and Switzerland Page 239
VI. Principles of Inspection and Certification of Organic Products
6.1. Requirements relating to inspection bodies Page 242
6.2. Certification of organic production Page 243
6.2.1. Frequently asked questions (FQA)
6.2.2. Organic standards : types of organic standards
6.2.3. International regulations (IFOAM, Codex Alimentarius)
6.2.4. The European regulation on Organic Production
6.2.5. The Swiss regulation on Organic Production
6.2.6. The US National Organic Program (NOP)
6.2.7. The Japanese Agricultural Standards (JAS)
6.2.8. Private Label Standards
6.2.9. Relationship to fair trade
6.3. Certification  requirements EU regulation and other standards Page 254
6.4. Requirements for crop production Page 258
6.5. Requirements for livestock production Page 262
6.6. Requirements for processors and traders Page 263
6.7. Additional and differing requirements for the US market Page 265
6.8. Additional and differing requirements for the Japanese market Page 267
C o n t e n t s
xii
6.9. Additional and differing requirements for private standards Page 270
6.10. Certification requirements for smallholder organizations Page 271
6.11. Import procedures for organic products into the EU Page 277
Annex I: 
Further Literature and Useful Websites
Annex II: 
List of trading companies, certification bodies 
and authorities by country
C o n t e n t s
xiii
xiv
Acknowledgements
The officer principally responsible for the publication
of this book was Djidiack Faye who received substantial
help from several research institutes and organizations.
Forschungsintitut für biologischen Landbau (FiBL),
Institut für Marktökologie (IMO) and Naturland wrote Part
A, B and D, comprising general aspects of organic farming
in the tropics and subtropics, technical aspects and best
management techniques of organic farming, and annexes
covering standards issues in the European Union and the
United States, including examples of private labels and useful
addresses. In addition to co-overseeing the development of
the book at various stages, the Swiss Import Promotion
Programme (SIPPO) wrote Part C on market development
and potential. Individual contributors included Markus
Stern, Franziska Staubli, Lukas Kilcher, Salvador
Garibay, Florentine Lechleitner, Birgit Wilhelm and Udo
Censkovski. A number of persons assisted with this book
at various stages: Franz Augustburger, Jõrn Berger,
Petra Heid, Joachim Milz, Christine Streit, Martin Koller
and Sigrid Alexander. We would also like to thank Claro AG
for supplying us with pictures. the administrative IMIS
procedures for contractual services as well as the compi-
lation of preliminary texts from main contributors was led
by Yvonne Paredes-Ayma.
This book could not have been prepared without the
financial support of the Swiss Agency for Development and
Cooperation (SDC) and, above all, without the tireless
efforts of the many people who were involved in the
production of the book.
We would like to address our special thanks to the Swiss
Government, particularly Mr. Walter Fust, Director
General of SDC and Mr. Heierli for their invaluable
support. We would like also to thank the authors, who were
extremely cooperative in reviewing the papers they wrote
for this book. 
A c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s
xv
F o r e w o r d  b y  t h e  S e c r e t a r y - G e n e r a l  o f  U N C T A D  M r .  R u b e n s  R i c u p e r o
xvi
Foreword by Rubens Ricupero,
Secretary-General of UNCTAD
Food safety and quality issues are receiving a great deal of
attention today. Never has the safety of the food supply
come under such scrutiny. Consumers are becoming better
educated and more demanding about food-related issues,
and regulators are increasingly active in safeguarding food
products. 
At the same time, confidence in food quality has been
shaken in recent years by such incidents as the discovery
of salmonella in poultry and eggs and the probable link
between bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in
cattle and new variant Creutzfeldt Jacob Disease (CJD) in
humans. Consumers have become somewhat distrustful of
their Governments’ ability to assure food safety and are
demanding more transparency and traceability in the food
chain.  There is every indication that these requirements
will increase in the future, especially in relation to food
containing genetically modified organisms (GMOs). 
Primary producers, processors, retailers and catering
establishments now recognize the need for independent
monitoring of their products, procedures and services.
Implementation of food quality and safety programmes
is seen as one way to strengthen the ability of companies
to protect and enhance brands and private labels, promote
consumer confidence and conform to regulatory and
market requirements. Food safety and quality standards
are seen as a key element in international trade in food
products. Calls from such institutions as the WTO for
food processing companies to establish quality control
systems have acquired a new urgency. 
Organic markets are growing at the rate of 20% a
year. The United States and Europe are leading the way.
It is estimated that the United States accounts for
US$ 6.6 billion, the UK for US$ 2 billion and Japan
US$ 3 billion. Some 21% of all milk in Denmark; 10%
of all farms in Austria, 0.5% of all food sales in France
are organic. This sudden interest of consumers in organic
products has led to significant gaps between domestic
supply and demand in many developed countries. Thus,
in the United Kingdom, demand for organic products is
currently increasing by 40% annually, whereas supply is
expanding by only 25% 1. Moreover, 80% of organic fruits
and vegetables sold in the United Kingdom are import-
ed. This might give developing-country producers of
organic products an opportunity to expand their market
shares in developed countries. That prospect could be
further enhanced by the fact that in many developing
countries, traditional agriculture uses few or no agro-
chemical inputs. In India, for example, 70% of the
arable land is mainly rain-fed and fertilizers have not
been used. Similarly, about 10% of the cultivated land in
Brazil is farmed by using “alternative” agriculture
methods. Developing countries may thus have a relative
comparative advantage in the world market for organic
fruits and vegetables.
Price premiums for organic products can play a key
role in developing countries. In Brazil, for instance, the
production cost for organic oranges is nearly 50% higher
than for conventionally produced oranges. However,
these higher costs do not prevent producers and middle-
men from realizing higher prof its, based on price
premiums of organic products at the retail level. The
share of producer prices in retail prices of organic prod-
ucts rarely exceeds 10-20%. Theoretically, then, even
significantly higher producer costs can be compensated
by moderate premiums at retail level, provided
importers, wholesalers and retailers do not appropriate
all or most of the extra income.    
Francophone and anglophone regional workshops
have been organized in Africa through UNCTAD’s project
on Capacity –building for Diversification and Commodity–
based Development. They have aimed at assisting devel-
oping countries’ efforts toward horizontal, vertical and
geographical diversif ication of production and trade
structures. Agriculture, particularly the horticultural
sector, has been the main focus of this project.
F o r e w o r d  b y  t h e  S e c r e t a r y - G e n e r a l  o f  U N C T A D  M r .  R u b e n s  R i c u p e r o
xvii
Workshop participants paid close attention to options
for enhancing production and trading opportunities
for organic agriculture. Workshop recommendations
emphasized the importance of well-def ined policies,
including institutional support and export promotion, to
strengthen the capacities of developing countries to take
advantage of production and trading opportunities for
organic products. Governments were invited to implement
supportive policies and play a proactive role in promoting
development of the organic sector. Participants also
expressed concern that the plethora of standards and
regulations at the national, regional and international
levels creates diff iculties for exporters, particularly
those from developing countries. The need for readily
accessible reference material on production and market
opportunities was repeatedly voiced.
Producers and exporters in developing countries
expect to increase organic exports, to seek new markets
and, more generally, to acquire greater competitiveness.
This publication on Organic fruit and vegetables from
the tropics: market, certification and production infor-
mation for producers and international trading companies
attempts to respond to these concerns by identifying
ways and means of enhancing the production and export
capacities of developing countries in organic agriculture.
We hope our readers f ind it useful and welcome their
comments.
Rubens Ricupero
1 See Press release issued by BIOFACH Trade Fair, Nüremberg,
Germany, February 2001.
Foreword by Walter Fust,
Director General of Swiss Agency for
Development and Cooperation (SDC)
This book on “Organic Fruit and Vegetable Production in
the Tropics, and International Trade” fills a gap: on the one
hand, organic production methods are not yet very well
established in the tropics, on the other hand, the largest
share of the emerging markets for organic products have
gone to the farmers in the North. If this book can enhance
the knowledge on both these lines, it may contribute to
better incomes and a fairer share of trade for developing
countries, and especially for West Africa.
It was often argued that – in order to avoid risks – small
farmers should focus on traditional products such as millet
for home consumption and for local markets. Such a risk
avoiding strategy is certainly recommendable, but if small
farmers in tropical countries produce only low value crops,
their incomes will remain low and so will poverty continue
to persist. The new markets for high value crops and
especially high quality organic food remain to be
conquered and may be the only growth factor for rural
areas, especially if commodity prices (cotton, sugar,
coffee, cocoa) remain at the present levels of all time lows.
The same is true with many staple crops such as rice,
maize where imports of (often still highly subsidized)
products are shipped at lower costs to the urban agglomer-
ations than what local production and transportation over
bumpy roads can compete with. In this sense, the market
for organic products from the tropics is a new opportunity
which small farmers should not miss out, despite the higher
risks associated with this. 
It is SDC's concern that export crops do not only favor
large plantations but many small farmers in even remote
rural areas. This requires the special attention of policy
makers, of extension services, of NGOs and of a responsible
private sector: although small farmers can only participate
in the World markets if they provide quality, quantity at the
right time and the right price, small farmers should not
become the object of speculation and short term trade
interests. This book does not provide any insurance against
such risks, but it provides a good knowledge base on the
level of production, of markets and of regulations and spec-
ifications to all the stakeholders who will make use of this
book. We hope that this book will contribute to generate
new and sustainable incomes for many small farmers and
also a good business for all the links in the supply chain
towards the emerging markets.
Walter Fust
F o r e w o r d  b y  S D C
xviii
Foreword by Markus Stern,
Director of Swiss Import Promotion Programme
(SIPPO)
The major organic markets are expected to grow with
growth rates between 10 to 30% or even more in the next 5
to 10 years. In all major organic markets, the fruit and
vegetable product group plays an important role. In Europe
and the USA, production of organic products has increased
tremendously within the last 20 years. Today almost every
product can be purchased in organic quality. However, the
choice of exotic products is rather limited today and
demand exceeds supply. Accordingly, organically grown
fruits and vegetables from subtropical and tropical areas are
facing good marketing perspectives. At export level, organic
price premiums of about 10 to 50% are reported.  
In the field of production in general, the primary sector
continues to play a significant role (mining, fishing, coffee,
petroleum, etc.). The degree of industrialization is fairly
low as is, therefore, the export of products processed with
higher levels of added value within the country. However,
raw-material prices are subject to price fluctuations to a
substantially greater degree than semi-finished, finished
products or outstanding products with a special certificate
– an organic certificate. The inflow of resources and foreign
exchange earnings from foreign trade/exports are of major
importance for an emerging market or market in transition.
Both trade promotion measures as well as a lasting increase
in their involvement in trade support the competitiveness of
these countries in their active integration into global
trading. Access for their export products to industrial
markets is therefore of decisive importance. SIPPO (Swiss
Import Promotion Programme – a Swiss funded programme
in favour of emerging markets and markets in transition)
therefore believes that the market for exotic organic fruits
and vegetables is a great opportunity for many emerging
markets and markets in transition and can contribute to
meaningful socio-economic and ecologically sustainable
development. 
With this guide, the publishers aim to help emerging
markets exploit this opportunity to the full. The aim of this
guide is to provide producers and trading companies from
emerging markets with:
< Information on market potential and conditions for
access to European, American and Japanese markets for
organic products. 
< Details of production and processing requirements as
well as best management practices in a selection of
organic tropical fruits and vegetables. 
< A list of useful addresses and contacts in selected
European, American and Japanese countries.
The international market for organic food in general is
booming, worth a total of approximately 20 billion US$
(2000); Europe leads with sales of about USD 9 billion
followed by the USA with around USD 8 billion and Japan
with USD 1.5 billion. 
Markus Stern
F o r e w o r d  S I P P O
xix

P A R T
Production and Basic Principles 
of Organic Agriculture
A
General Aspects of Organic Farming 
in the Tropics and Subtropics
1
1.1. Philosophy and Principles of
Organic Agriculture
1.1.1 Definition and Principles
What is Organic Agriculture?
For some people organic agriculture is “farming without
chemical fertilizers and pesticides”. This is short and concise,
but misses important characteristics. Organic agriculture
follows the logic of a living organism in which all elements
(soil, plants, farm animals, insects, the farmer etc.) are
closely linked with one other. Organic farming therefore
must be based on a thorough understanding and clever
management of these interactions and processes. 
The US Department of Agriculture has framed the 
following definition: “Organic farming is a production system
that avoids or largely excludes the use of synthetically
compounded fertilizers, pesticides, growth regulators and
livestock feed additives. To the maximum extent feasible,
organic farming systems rely on crop rotations, crop residues,
animal manures, legumes, green manures, off-farm organic
wastes, and aspects of biological pest control to maintain
soil productivity and tilt, to support plant nutrients and to
control insects, weeds and other pests.”
Organic Agriculture is often defined by standards that
explain what the principles are and which methods and
inputs are not permitted. Standards define a minimum
common ground. However, they do not provide guidelines
on what an ideal organic farming system should look like.
Principles and Aims of Organic Agriculture
In a process of several decades, the international organic
community, organized in the IFOAM movement (International
Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements), agreed on
a common understanding of what the principles of organic
agriculture are. IFOAM clearly formulated the minimum
requirements in the “IFOAM Basic Standards”. These
standards are based on a number of principles that show
that organic farming is much more than renouncing the use
of agro-chemicals.
A System Approach
Conventional farming puts its focus on achieving maximum
yields of a specific crop. It is based on a rather simple
understanding: crop yields are increased by nutrient inputs
and are reduced through pests, diseases and weeds – elements
that must be combated. Organic agriculture is a holistic way
of farming: besides production of goods of high quality, an
important aim is the conservation of the natural resources
fertile soil, clean water and rich biodiversity. The art of
organic farming is to make the best use of ecological
principles and processes. Organic farmers can learn a great
deal from studying the interactions in natural ecosystems
such as forests. 
Agroforestry Systems
Trees and other plants take up nutrients from the soil and
incorporate them in their biomass. The nutrients go back to
the soil when leaves fall or plants die. Part of the biomass
is eaten by various animals (including insects), and their
excrements return the nutrients to the soil. In the soil, a
huge number of soil organisms are involved in the decom-
position of organic material which makes nutrients available
to plant roots again. The dense root system of forest plants
collects the released nutrients almost completely. Forests
host a high diversity of plant varieties of different size, root
systems and requirements. Animals are also part of the 
system. If one organism drops out, it is immediately
replaced by another one that fills the gap. Thus “space”
light, water and nutrients are used to the optimum. The
result is a very stable system.
Recycling Nutrients 
Organic nutrient management is based on biodegradable
material, i.e. plant and animal residues. Nutrient cycles are
closed with the help of composting, mulching, green
manuring, crop rotation etc. Farm animals can play an
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
2
important role in the nutrient cycle: their dung is of high
value and its use enables nutrients provided with the fodder
to be recycled. If carefully managed, losses of nutrients due to
leaching, soil erosion and gasification can be reduced to the
minimum. This reduces the dependency on external inputs
and helps to save costs. However, nutrients exported from the
farm with the sold produce need to be replaced.
Soil Fertility 
Soil and its fertility constitute the center of the natural
ecosystem. A more or less permanent soil cover prevents
soil erosion and helps build up soil fertility. The continuous
supply of organic material feeds a huge number of soil
organisms and provides an ideal environment for them. As
a result the soil becomes soft and capable of taking up and
storing large quantities of nutrients and water. Organic
farmers give central importance to the improvement of soil
fertility. They stimulate the activity of soil organisms with
organic manures. Mulching and cover crops are used
among other methods to prevent soil erosion.
Crop Diversity 
Organic farms grow several crops including, trees, either as
mixed cropping or in rotation. Animals are an integrated
part of the farm system. The diversity of crops not only
allows optimum use of the resources but also serves as an
economic security in case of pest or disease attack or low
market prices for certain crops.
Eco-balance and Bio-control 
Pests and diseases do occur in natural ecosystems, but they
rarely cause large-scale damage. Due to diversity, it is diffi-
cult for them to spread. Many pests are controlled by other
organisms such as insects or birds, and plants usually can
recover from an infestation on their own. Organic farmers try
to keep pests and diseases at a level which does not cause
economic damage. The main focus is on supporting the health
and resistance of the crop. Beneficial insects are promoted
by offering them a habitat and food. If pests reach critical
levels, natural enemies and herbal preparations are used.
Back to Nature?
Organic farming aims at following the laws of nature. Does
this mean that organic farms must be as close to natural sys-
tems as possible? Within the organic movement one will
find farmers who focus on natural farming, and others who
take a purely commercial approach. The majority of organic
farmers probably lies somewhere in between these two
extremes. Most farmers will expect sufficient production
from the farm to make a living. For them, the challenge
is to follow the principles of nature to achieve a high
productivity.
Organic by Neglect?
In some areas, perennial plantations are farmed with low
intensity by merely stopping any nutrient supply or pest
management while continuing to harvest the produce.
While maintenance costs are as such low, yields decrease
after some time. Some of these neglected plantations
achieved organic certification as they fulfill the minimum
criteria of the standards. However, it is rather doubtful
whether this approach offers a long-term perspective for
farmers. As organic farming seeks  to contribute to food secu-
rity, organic by neglect is not the right strategy.
Sustainability Aims
Organic agriculture claims to be sustainable. In the context
of agriculture, sustainability refers to the successful
management of resources of agriculture to satisfy human
needs while at the same time maintaining or enhancing the
quality of the environment and conserving natural resources.
Sustainability in organic farming must therefore be seen in
a holistic sense, which includes ecological, economical and
social aspects. Only if the three dimensions are fulfilled, an
agricultural system can be called sustainable.
Ecological Sustainability
< recycling the nutrients instead 
of applying external inputs
< no chemical pollution of soil and water
< promote biological diversity
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
3
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
< improve soil fertility and build up humus
< prevent soil erosion and compaction
< animal friendly husbandry
< using renewable energies
Social Sustainability
< sufficient production for subsistence and income
< a safe nutrition of the family with healthy food
< good working conditions for both men and women
< building on local knowledge and traditions
Economic Sustainability
< satisfactory and reliable yields
< low costs on external inputs and investments
< crop diversification to improve income safely
< value addition through quality improvement 
and on-farm processing
< high efficiency to improve competitiveness
Bio-dynamic Agriculture
Bio dynamic farming is a special type of organic
agriculture. It fulfils all principles and standards of
organic farming but goes a step beyond: bio-dynamic
farming includes a spiritual dimension of agricul-
ture. It is based on the concept of “anthroposophy”
developed in the 1920’s by the Austrian philosopher
Rudolf Steiner. He aimed at a new approach to science
which integrates observation of natural phenomena
and spiritual dimensions. In the words of Steiner:
“Matter is never without spirit, and spirit never
without Matter.”
Some foundations of bio-dynamic farming are:
Cosmic Rhythms: The rhythms of the sun, moon,
planets and stars influence the growth of plants.
By timing the activities of tillage, sowing and
harvesting, the farmer can use this influence to the
crops´ advantage.
Vitality: Besides the physical and chemical charac-
teristics, matter has a vital quality which influences
organisms. Thus, bio-dynamic farmers and gardeners
aim at quality, and not only quantity.
Biodynamic Preparations: Certain naturally
occurring plant and animal materials are combined
in specific preparations and applied in highly diluted
form to compost piles, to the soil or directly to the
plants. The forces within these preparations shall
organize the elements within the plants and animals.
The Farm Organism: A farm is considered as a
whole organism integrating plants, animals and
humans. There should be just the right number of
animals to provide manure for fertility, and these
animals should be fed from the farm itself.
For product marketing services, bio-dynamic farmers
are organized in a world wide certification system named
“Demeter”. The "Demeter"-label is used to assure the
consumer that the product has been produced by biody-
namic methods.
1.1.2 Distinction From Other Farming
Systems
Is Traditional Farming Organic?
Agro-chemicals have been used on a large scale only since
the 1960’s. Therefore, farming communities which have not
been influenced by the so-called “Green Revolution”
automatically meet the most important criteria of organic
agriculture, i.e. the non-use of any chemical fertilizers,
pesticides and genetically modified organisms. These
agricultural systems are referred to as “Traditional
Farming”.
In many countries, the population density increased
tremendously and many traditional farming systems have
been unable to meet the yield expectations of the farmers.
Due to reduced fallow periods, overgrazing or exploitative
cultivation, many traditionally farmed areas face severe
degradation. At the same time, higher yielding crop varieties
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
4
have been introduced which are more prone to diseases.
Organic farming tries to meet the increased needs of the
growing population while not risking the long-term
productivity of the farmland.
Many methods and techniques of organic agriculture
have originated from various traditional farming systems
all over the world. However, not all traditional systems
make use of these methods, sometimes for the simple reason
that they are not known in a specific region. In addition,
organic farming disposes of a range of rather modern tech-
nologies such as the design of intensive orchards, use of
antagonistic microbes in pest management, high yielding
but disease resistant varieties or the use of highly efficient
green manure plants.
Whether a certain traditional farming system can be
called organic will depend on whether all the organic
standards are fulf illed. For instance, some traditional
systems are in conflict with the requirements of organic
animal husbandry (e.g. sufficient space and free move-
ment), the necessary prevention of soil erosion, the ban
on cutting forests and burning biomass (e.g. slash and
burn systems).
“Sustainable” Agriculture
As the negative environmental impact of green revolu-
tion in agriculture became more and more obvious,
sustainability in agriculture became a widely accepted
objective. Sustainable kinds of agriculture claim to be
environmentally sound, resource-conserving, economi-
cally viable, socially supportive and commercially
competitive. As far as goals are concerned, sustainable
agriculture therefore has much in common with organic
agriculture.
However, there is no general agreement to what
extent sustainability must be achieved and which methods
and inputs can be accepted. Therefore, systems which do
use chemical fertilizers, pesticides or genetically
modified organisms are classif ied as sustainable.
Integrated Production (IP) or Integrated Pest
Management (IPM), for example, only avoids certain
highly toxic pesticides and reduces the application of
others to a certain extent.
Systems such as Low External Input (Sustainable)
Agriculture (LEIA or LEISA) or eco-farming partially
renounce the use of agrochemicals. They seek to optimize
the use of locally available resources by interlinking the
components of the farm system so that they complement
each other and have the greatest possible synergistic effect.
External inputs shall only be used to provide elements that
are deficient in the ecosystem and to enhance available
biological, physical and human resources.
It is not always possible to draw a clear line between
different systems. There are sustainable agriculture systems
that are also organic, and there are even organic farms
which are not really sustainable, though they fulfill the
minimum requirements of the standards.
Integrated Production (IP)
Integrated Production (IP) has gained importance over the
last few years, especially in economies of transition and in
industrialized countries. It does not refrain from using
agro-chemicals, but aims at a reduction of its application. For
plant protection, a combination of bio-control methods and
chemical pesticides is used (Integrated Pest Management).
If damage by pest or disease reaches defined threshold
levels, chemical pesticides are applied. For plant nutrition,
chemical fertilizers can be used, but usually maximum
amounts are defined. Herbicides also are used.
The regulations on IP are not always very clear and vary
from country to country, if formulated at all. A few countries
have developed labels and a control system for integrated
production. In some countries integrated systems are called
“green production”. Above all, integrated production
follows the same approach as conventional agriculture, and
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
5
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
is far from the holistic understanding of organic agriculture.
However, it can contribute to a healthier environment as it
is easier for a large number of farmers to follow.
1.1.3 Why Organic Agriculture? 
After the initial success of the “Green Revolution” it
became evident that this kind of farming has many
unwanted side effects, both on natural resources (soil,
water, bio-diversity) and on human health:
< Soil: Vast areas of once fertile lands were degraded
due to soil erosion, salinization or a general loss of
soil fertility.
< Water: Freshwater resources have been polluted or
overexploited through intense use of agro-chemicals
and excessive irrigation.
< Bio-diversity: Many wild and cultivated plant 
and animal species were wiped out and landscapes
became dull.
< Human Health: Residues of harmful pesticides 
in food or drinking water endanger both farmer's 
and consumer's health. Further health risks from
antibiotics in meat, BSE infection (mad cow disease)
and genetically modified organisms (GMO).
< In addition, this kind of agriculture is based on an
excessive use of external inputs and consumes a lot 
of energy from non-renewable resources.
It must be acknowledged that with the help of the Green
Revolution technologies crop yields increased tremendously,
especially in the temperate zones. Several Southern countries
also experienced the Green Revolution as a success story.
However, the success of the Green Revolution in the South
was unevenly spread: while technology brought consider-
able yield increase in fertile river plains or irrigated land, it
rather failed on marginal soils, which constitute the major
part of the land in the tropics. As the fertile lands usually
belong to the wealthier farmers, marginal farmers did not
benefit greatly from the new technologies.
One reason for its failure on marginal lands is the low
efficiency of fertilizer application on tropical soils: Unlike
soils in temperate regions, many tropical soils do not retain
chemical fertilizers well. The nutrients are easily washed
out from the soil or evaporate as gas. The major part of the
applied fertilizers may subsequently be lost.
In countries where labor is comparatively cheap but
inputs are expensive, expenses for agro-chemicals can
make up a large proportion of the production costs.
Frequently, these inputs are purchased on loans which are
to be paid back when the harvest is sold. If yields are low-
er than expected (e.g. because soil fertility decreased) or
crops entirely fail (e.g. due to attack of an uncontrollable
pest or disease), farmers still have to cover the costs of the
agro-chemicals they used. Thus, indebtedness is a wide-
spread problem among farmers in the South. As prices for
agricultural products tend to decrease continuously while
prices for inputs increase (e.g. due to reduced subsidies), it
is becoming difficult for many farmers to earn sufficient
income with conventional agriculture.
Benefits of Organic Agriculture
< soil conservation and maintenance 
of soil fertility
< less pollution of water (groundwater, rivers,
lakes)
< protection of wildlife (birds, frogs, 
insects etc.)
< higher biodiversity, more diverse landscape
< better treatment of farm animals
< less utilization of non-renewable external
inputs and energy
< less pesticide residues in food
< no hormones and antibiotics in animal 
products
< better product quality (taste, storage 
properties).
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
6
1.1.4 Development of Organic
Agriculture
Alternative ways of farming were already developed before
the invention of synthetic agro-chemicals. Some innovative
pioneers tried to improve traditional farming systems with
methods characteristic of organic farming. These were new
approaches at the time, and focused on soil fertility based
on humus that aim at an ecological balance within the
farm. When the use of agro-chemicals combined with the
introduction of high yielding varieties and intense mecha-
nization became widespread, a few people opposed this
new development and set out on organic farming practices
like composting, improved crop rotations or green manuring.
As the negative impact of the Green Revolution on health
and environment became more evident in the 1970’s and
80's, the awareness of “organic” issues slowly increased
both among farmers and consumers. Related farming
systems like “Permaculture” or “Low External Input
Agriculture (LEIA)” were developed.
Only in the 90's did organic farming experience a strong
rise. A number of environmental disasters and food
scandals supported a growing consumer awareness and an
increasingly supportive policy in some countries. At the
same time, a range of innovative organic technologies
were developed. Still, organic agriculture constitutes only
a slight percentage of a country’s farming sector.
Governmental support for research, extension or marketing
in organic farming is still very low in most countries.
Nevertheless, organic farming at present has promising
growth rates all over the world.
Organic Farming Worldwide
Organic Agriculture is currently practiced in more than 120
countries. It is estimated that worldwide about 17 million
hectares are managed organically. A large part of this area
consists of extensive pastures managed by a few farmers.
The share of land area under organic management per
country is highest in some European countries, where it
takes a considerable share of the total agricultural land. The
success of organic agriculture in these countries is mainly
due to the increased consumer awareness of health and
environmental issues, the mainstreaming of the marketing
(e.g. supermarkets) and increasingly favorabe national
policies.
In most countries in the South, official data relating to
land under certified organic management is scarce, and one
may assume that organic farming is still very much a
minority activity. However, there are some traditionally
farmed areas where few or no agro-chemicals are used.
Some of them could be easily brought to full compliance
with organic standards' requirements.
Organic trade is growing rapidly. According to estimates
by the International Trade Center UNCTAD/WTO (ITC)
the world retail market for organic food and beverages
reached an estimated US dollars 21 billion in 2001. ITC
estimates that annual sales growth rates will range from
five to twenty percent over the medium term, depending on
the market. Organic food sales could jump from one percent
up to ten percent of total retail food sales in major markets
during the next few years.
Though export markets are difficult to access, there are
good market opportunities for developing countries for
exporting organic products that are not produced in Europe
or North America, such as coffee, tea, cocoa, spices, tropical
fruits, certain vegetables and citrus fruits. The biggest markets
for organic products world-wide are in the USA, Europe
and Japan. Dependency on export markets constitutes a
high risk to Southern countries as world market prices for
organic products can fluctuate too. Therefore, it is important
for national organic movements to also develop a domestic
market for organic products. As in many tropical countries
food security is not assured many small holders depend on
their own food production, as such, focusing on export mar-
kets is perhaps even dangerous.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
7
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
1.2 Soil Management and Soil
Nutrition 
1.2.1 The Soil – A Living Organism
Soil is the most important production factor for crops and
at the same time is also the most influenced by the farmer.
Soils are very diverse and complex systems full of life. The
soil itself can be viewed as a living organism, because it is
a habitat for plants, animals and micro-organisms that are
all interlinked. 
The Composition and Structure of Soils
Soil consists in mineral particles, organic matter and
pores. Mineral particles originate from subsoil and rock,
which gets crushed to smaller and smaller pieces (sand,
silt and clay) through physical and chemical weathering
processes. Mineral particles contain nutrients that are
slowly released in the process of weathering. Plant roots
and some micro-organisms can actively dissolve
nutrients from mineral salts and use them for their
growth. 
In addition to mineral salts, soil contains organic mat-
ter, resulting from the decomposition of biomass. In most
agricultural soils of the tropics this decomposition repre-
sents only a small percentage, perhaps less than one percent
of the total solid material of the soil. It is however of
tremendous importance for the soil fertility. Organic matter
is mainly present in the top layer of the soil, which is sub-
ject to continuous transformation processes. Soil organic
matter can be further decomposed by soil organisms. The
resulting structures can recombine to form very stable
humus structures, which can remain in the soil for many
years and contribute significantly to the improvement the
soil structure.
Why Organic Matter Is so Important?
< Soil organic matter helps to build up a loose and soft
soil structure with a lot of pores. This leads to better
aeration, better infiltration of water and an easier 
penetration of roots.
< The visible parts of organic matter act like tiny
sponges which can hold water up to five times their
own weight. Therefore, in dry periods more water is
available for the plants for a longer time. This is 
especially important in sandy soils.
< The non-visible parts of organic matter act like a glue,
sticking soil particles together, thus forming stable
crumbs. Such aggregates improve the soil structure,
especially in clay and sandy soils.
< Beneficial micro-organisms and other soil organisms
such as earthworms also feed on organic material, thus
decomposing it. As these organisms require sufficient
humidity and aeration, soil organic matter provides a
suitable environment for them.
< Organic matter has a great capacity to retain nutrients and
release them continuously (nutrient exchange capacity
CEC). It thereby increases the capacity of the soil to 
supply the plants with nutrients and reduces nutrient losses
by leaching. This is especially important in ferralitic and
sandy soils as they naturally retain very few nutrients.
< Organic matter also prevents soils from becoming 
too acidic.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
8
Soil fertility is an important element of organic agriculture.
Soil Structure
Besides mineral particles and soil organic matter, soils also
consist of minute pores filled with air or water. The spatial
arrangement of particles and pores is summarized as “soil
structure”. Small pores are good in preserving moisture while
the larger ones allow a fast infiltration of rain or irrigation
water, but also help to drain the soil and ensure aeration. In
soils of good structure, mineral particles and soil organic
matter form stable aggregates. Organic matter works as a
kind of glue, sticking together soil particles. This process is
supported by soil organisms such as earth worms, bacteria
and fungus. Thus, the soil structure can be improved by
supplying organic matter to the soil. But it can also be
ruined by improper management e.g. tilling the soil in wet
conditions causes compaction.
Soil Testing
Chemical soil testing may yield valuable information
to specific questions. However, there are some
inherent problems related to analyzing nutrient
contents: For the plant, the total content of a certain
nutrient in a sample is not always relevant, as the
nutrient may be absorbed so strongly that it is not
available to the plant roots (e.g. Phosphorus).
Therefore, some tests treat the sample with solvents in
order to simulate the fraction of the nutrient available
to plants. This might be a realistic simulation for
conventional farming. In organically managed soils,
however, the higher activity of soil organisms can
result in a better availability of the nutrient, thus the
result of the test is not fully appropriate. The content of
other nutrients, such as nitrogen, fluctuates consider-
ably within a few days, so that it highly depends on
the point of time when the sample is taken.
Still, chemical soil analysis can be useful in some
cases, e.g. to analyze the level of acidity of the soil (pH)
or to detect deficiency of nutrients such as Potassium
(K) or micronutrients. Organic farmers might be
especially interested in knowing and monitoring the
content of soil organic matter.
Physical testing, e.g. related to water retention
capacity or soil structure can yield interesting infor-
mation, but samples must be taken very carefully.
Biological analysis, e.g. of the activity of soil organ-
isms, must be done in specially equipped laborato-
ries and is rather costly. Chemical soil analysis on
pesticide residues is highly complicated as one must
know which pesticide to look for, and analysis are
very costly. If soil tests are used, make sure that the
relevant aspects are investigated and that the results
of the tests are critically discussed.
The Soil-Microcosm
A teaspoon of active soil is the habitat of millions of soil
organisms! Some are of animal origin, some are of plant
origin. The organisms vary greatly in size. Some are visible
to the naked eye, such as earthworms, mites, spring-tails or
termites. Most of them, however, are so small that they
can only be seen with a microscope, thus they are called
micro-organisms. The most important micro-organisms
are bacteria, fungus and protozoa. Micro-organisms are the
key elements to the quality and fertility of soils, but for
humans, they do their work invisibly. The greater the vari-
ety of species and the higher their number, the greater the
natural fertility of the soil.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
9
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
Table 1: 
Different Types of Organisms Living in the Soil
Some larger soil organisms Some soil micro-organisms
Earthworms Bacteria
Spiders Algae
Slugs and snails Fungus
Beatles Protozoa
Spring tails Actinomycetes
Mites 
Millipedes
Slaters
Soil organisms are important because they:
< help to decompose organic material and build up
humus
< mingle organic matter with soil particles and thus 
help to build stable crumbs
< dig tunnels, which encourages deep rooting 
of plants and good aeration of the soil
< help to release nutrients from mineral particles
< control pest and disease organisms affecting 
the roots of crops.
As the plant roots and the soil organisms consume air,
good air circulation within the soil is crucial for their devel-
opment. Soil organism activity is generally low when soils
are dry, very wet or too hot. Activity is highest in warm,
moist soils when food (i.e. biomass) is available.
Earthworms accelerate the decomposition of biomass
by removing dead plant material from the soil surface.
During the digestion of organic material, they mix organic
and mineral soil particles and build stable crumbs, which
help improve the soil structure. Their excrements contain
5x more nitrogen, 7x more phosphate, 11x more potash and
2x more magnesia and calcium than normal earth. Last but
not the least, their tunnels promote infiltration and drainage
of rainwater and thus prevent soil erosion and water
logging. Earthworms need sufficient supply of biomass,
moderate temperature and sufficient humidity. That’s why
they are very fond of mulching. Frequent tillage decreases
the number of earthworms in the soil, as does the use of
pesticides. 
Mycorrhiza – A Beneficial Fungus
Important representatives of the soil fungi are the
“mycorrhizae” that live in association (symbiosis) with
plant roots. Both the plant and the fungus profit from the
association: the plant gets nutrients collected by the fungus
and the fungus receives assimilates (“food”) from the plant
in exchange. Mycorrhizae are present in all types of
soils, but not all crops are symbiotic with the fungus.
Mycorrhizae have several functions that are of great interest
to the farmer:
< They enlarge the rooting zone of plants and can 
enter into small soil pores.
< They dissolve nutrients such as phosphorus from 
mineral particles and carry them to the plant.
< They make soil aggregates more stable thus improving
the soil structure.
< They preserve moisture and improve the water supply
to the plants.
Mycorrhiza formation depends on the soil conditions, the
crops that are grown and the management practices:
< Soil tillage and burning of biomass drastically 
harm the mycorrhizae.
< High nutrient levels (especially phosphorus) and
chemical pesticides suppress symbiosis.
< Mixed cropping, crop rotation and the cultivation 
of perennial plants encourage mycorrhiza.
< Practice mulching to stabilize soil temperature 
and moisture.
Among the naturally occurring species of mycorrhizae,
not all show the same efficiency to derive phosphorus from
the soil. That is why artif icial inoculation of specific
mycorrhiza varieties can improve their use. Inoculation,
however, does not reduce the importance of offering
appropriate living conditions for these organisms.
How to Improve and Maintain Soil Fertility?
Farmers can improve the fertility of their soil by various
management practices: 
< Protection of the soil from strong sunlight and heavy
rain by means of plant cover or mulch in order to 
prevent soil erosion and to preserve moisture.
< A balanced crop rotation or mixed cropping: 
a suitable sequence of annual crops grown on a field
for preventing a depletion of the soil.
< An appropriate tillage method for obtaining a good
soil structure without causing erosion and compaction.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
10
< A good nutrient management: application of manures
and fertilizers according to the demands of the crops
in their respective growth stages.
< Feeding and protection of soil organisms: enhancing
the activity of beneficial soil microbes and organisms
like earth worms by supplying organic material.
< To stabilize the structure, it is important to protect the
soil surface with mulch or plant cover and to apply
organic material (ideally compost).
How to Produce More Biomass on the Farm?
< Integrate green fallow periods with green manures 
in the crop rotation.
< Applying compost and animal manures.
< Aim at having the soil covered with plants the 
whole year round.
< Integrate fodder cultivation in the farm (grass, 
fodder hedges).
< Use unproductive space (e.g. along paths, field 
borders, steep slopes) for planting trees or hedge rows. 
< Use unproductive fields and unproductive time in a
rotation (in between two crops) for planting vigorous
nitrogen fixing crops (such as Canavalia spp. and
Cayanus cayan).
< Establish agroforestry systems where appropriate.
< Leave single trees standing in the field (e.g. nitrogen
fixing trees), manage them with intense pruning.
< Let cattle graze or spend some nights on harvested
fields (it can also be the neighbor’s cattle) in order 
to profit from their droppings.
1.2.2 Soil Cultivation and Tillage
Careful soil cultivation can improve the soil’s capacity to
retain water, its aeration, capacity of infiltration, warming up,
evaporation etc. But soil cultivation can also harm the soil
fertility as it accelerates erosion and the decomposition of
humus. Depending on the cropping system and the soil type,
appropriate soil cultivation patterns must be developed.
Aims of Soil Cultivation:
< Loosen the soil to facilitate the penetration 
of plant roots.
< Improve the aeration (nitrogen and oxygen 
from the air).
< Increase infiltration of water.
< Reduce evaporation.
< Encourage the activity of the soil organisms.
< Destroy or control weeds and soil pests.
< Incorporate crop residues and manures into the soil.
< Prepare the site for seeds and seedlings.
< Repair soil compaction caused by previous activities.
Minimum and Zero-tillage
In tropical soils, regular tillage accelerates the decomposition
of organic matter which can lead to nutrient losses. The
mixing of soil layers can severely harm certain soil organisms.
Soil after tillage is very prone to soil erosion if left uncovered
before the onset of heavy rains. Zero-tillage systems help to
build up a natural soil structure with a crumbly top soil rich
in organic matter and full of soil organisms. Nutrient losses
are reduced to a minimum. Soil erosion won't be a problem
as long as there is a permanent plant cover or sufficient
input of organic material. Last but not least, farmers can
save a lot of labor. However, zero-tillage is a challenge for
organic producers: tillage is – especially in annual crops –
one important tool for weed management and therefore
widely practiced in organic agriculture. To minimize the
negative impact of soil cultivation while benefiting from its
advantages, the organic farmer should aim at reducing the
number of interventions to the minimum and choose
methods that conserve the natural qualities of the soil. 
Types of Soil Cultivation
Depending on the aim of the soil cultivation, different
cultivation practices are implemented during different
stages of the cropping cycle:
< Post-harvest: In order to accelerate decomposition, the
residues of the previous crop are incorporated into the soil
(15 to 20 cm) before preparing the seedbed for the next crop.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
11
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
< Primary Tillage: In annual crops or new plantations,
primary tillage is usually done with a plough or 
a similar instrument. In principle, soil cultivation
should achieve a flat turning of the top soil and 
a loosening of the medium deep soil. 
< Seedbed Preparation: Before sowing or planting,
secondary soil cultivation is done to crush and
smoothen the ploughed surface. If weed pressure is
high, seedbeds can be prepared early thus allowing
weed seeds to germinate before the crop is sown. 
< In-between the Crop: Once the crop is established,
shallow soil cultivation is applied to suppress weeds,
enhances the aeration of the soil, to reduce the 
evaporation of soil moisture from the deeper soil 
layers and to stimulate the decomposition of organic
matter thus making nutrients available.
Tools should be chosen considering the soil cultivation purpose,
the soil type, the crop and the available power source:
< primary cultivation: pole plough, mouldboard 
plough, digging fork, spade
< secondary cultivation: cultivators, harrows, rakes
< inter-row cultivation: inter-row cultivators, hoes
< land forming: ridgers, hoes.
Soil Compaction
If soils are cultivated in wet conditions or burdened with
heavy machinery, there is a risk of soil compaction which
results in suppressed root growth, reduced aeration and
water logging. Where soil compaction is a potential problem,
farmers should be aware of the following aspects: 
< The risk of compaction is highest when the soil struc-
ture is disturbed in wet conditions.
< Do not drive vehicles on your land soon after rains.
< Plowing of wet soils can lead to a smearing of the
plough sole.
< Soils rich in sand are less prone to soil compaction
than soils rich in clay.
< High content of soil organic matter reduces the risk 
of soil compaction.
< It is very difficult to restore good soil structure once
soil compaction has taken place.
< Deep tillage in dry conditions and the cultivation of
deep rooted plants can help to repair soil compaction.
Soil Erosion
Many tropical countries have distinctly dry and wet
seasons. During the dry season, ground vegetation usually
becomes scarce and thin, leaving the soil uncovered. As a
result, when the rains arrives, large amounts of valuable
topsoil can be washed away, leaving the land uneven with
gullies and low fertility soil. Not only steep slopes but plain
fields are also prone to soil erosion, and can be severely
affected. Besides rain, excessive irrigation can also cause
soil erosion.
Strategies for preventing soil erosion should ideally be
combined: 
1. Reducing the erosive power of the rain drops by keeping
the soil covered (with vegetation or mulch). Cropping
systems should be designed in such a way that the soil
is almost permanently covered with plant canopy.
2. Improving the infiltration of the rain water into the soil.
The way to improve the infiltration is improving the soil
structure.
3. Reducing the speed of the water flowing down the
slopes with the help of construction such as bunds,
stone walls, living barriers, trenches, terraces. 
1.2.3 Green Manures and Cover
Crops
Green manures, cover crops and mulching are related to each
other and the difference between them can not be clearly
distinguished. With mulching and cover crops emphasis is
on protecting the soil, the main aim of green manures is to
provide nutrients to subsequent crops and to increase soil
fertility through addition of organic matter. Cover crops
have similar benefits as green manure, and in many cases
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
12
the same crops and management methods are used. There is
a way to distinguish cover crops from green manure:
< Cover crops are in most cases perennial and not 
incorporated into the soil. After cutting, plant-material
is left on the soil surface or harvested as animal fodder
or compost material. 
< Green manures are mostly temporary. They are worked
into the soil, where the fresh plant material releases
nutrients quickly and will be fully decomposed within
a short period of time. 
Cover crops and green manures have a number of benefits:
< They penetrate the soil with their roots, make it more
friable and to bind nutrients that would otherwise be
washed away.
< They suppress weeds and protect the soil from erosion
and direct sunlight.
< If leguminos plants are used, nitrogen is fixed from 
the air into the soil.
< Some green manures and cover crops can be used 
as fodder plants or even to provide food for human
consumption (e.g. beans and peas).
< By decomposing, green manures and cover crops
release all kinds of nutrients for the main crops 
to utilize, thus improving their yield.
< The incorporated plant material builds up organic 
matter in the soil and activates soil organisms. This
improves soil structure and water holding capacity. 
The following aspects must be considered before growing
green manures and cover crops:
< Labor is required for tillage, sowing, cutting and 
incorporation of plants into the soil, and is most intensive
where the amount of helpful equipment available is limited.
< If green manures and cover crops are intercropped
with the main crops, they might compete for nutrients,
water and light.
< When old or coarse plant material is incorporated into the
soil, nitrogen may be temporarily immobilized and there-
fore unavailable for plant growth (nitrogen immobilization).
< If food and space are in short supply, it may be more
appropriate to grow a food crop rather than a green
manure and recycle the crop residues, or to intercrop 
a green manure crop with the main crop.
< The benefits of green manures and cover crops occur over
the long term and are not always immediately visible.
Nitrogen Fixing Plants
Air offers potentially endless amounts of nitrogen. Plants of
the legume and mimosa family are capable of fixing nitrogen
from the air with their roots to use as a nutrient. Legumes
do this by living in association (symbiosis) with bacteria
called rhizobium that are hosted in nodules growing on the
roots. These bacteria take nitrogen from the air, transform
it and make it available for the host plant. Bacteria take the
necessary energy from the plant roots (sugars, the products of
photosynthesis). The blue-green algae, e.g. “azolla” growing
in rice fields, produce the energy through their own photo-
synthesis. The partnership between plant and rhizobia is
usually very specific. For this reason, it may be necessary to
introduce (inoculate) the bacteria the first time legume plants
are grown in a field. The better the nutrient and water supply,
soil qualities including soil acidity, temperature and light
for the plant, the better the legume can supply the bacteria
with energy and satisfy its own nitrogen needs.
Among nitrogen fixing plants the annual and the perennial
species can be distinguished. In 'alley cropping', perennial
shrubs are grown in rows between the main crop. The
benefits of nitrogen fixing trees and shrubs are:
< The leaves and twigs of nitrogen fixing trees are rich
in nitrogen and other plant nutrients and are a valuable
free source of fertilizer. With their roots, they directly
increase the nitrogen content of the soil and build up
soil organic matter. 
< Wood and timber: Some luxury timbers are provided
by nitrogen fixing trees. Fast-growing nitrogen fixing
trees also produce excellent fuel wood and charcoal. 
< Fodder and food: The highly nutritious and digestible
leaves of some nitrogen fixing trees make them 
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
13
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
excellent feed for animals. Several species of nitrogen
fixing trees produce food for humans (e.g. carob,
drumstick and tamarind).
< Protection and support: Nitrogen fixing trees can be
grown as living fences and hedges to protect crops
from wildlife, domestic animals, and people. Trees
with dense canopies can be grown as a windbreak or
to protect organic farms from conventional neighbors.
Nitrogen fixing trees may be grown to provide shade
for cacao or coffee or to provide support for climbing
crops such as yams, vanilla and black pepper.
Sowing the Green Manure and Cover Crops
< If grown within a crop rotation, the sowing time must
be chosen to enable the green manure to be cut down
and worked into the soil before the next crop is sown. 
< Green manures and cover crops need water for
germination and growth.
< The ideal seed density must be tested for each individual
situation. 
< In general, no additional fertilization is necessary. 
If legumes are grown in a field for the first time,
inoculation of the seeds with the specific rhizobia
may be necessary to profit from nitrogen fixation 
of the legume.
< If under-sown, the green manure is sown at the same
time as the main crop. If it grows faster than the main
crop and competition is too high, it can also be sown
later when the crop has been established. Later sowing
may be combined with a weeding passage.
Working the Green Manure into the Soil
< Timing: The time gap between digging in the green
manure and planting the next crop should not be
longer than 2 to 3 weeks so as to prevent nutrient 
losses from the decomposing green manure. 
< Crushing: Green manures are worked in most easily
when the plants are still young and fresh. If the green
manure plants are tall or contain bulky and hard plant
parts, it is preferable to chop the plants into pieces to
allow for easier decomposition. The older the plants, the
longer decomposition will take. The best time to dig 
in green manure plants is just before flowering. 
< Depth of incorporation: Green manures should not
be ploughed deeply into the soil. Instead, they should
only be worked in to the surface soil (in heavy soils
only 5 to 15 cm deep, in light soils 10 to maximum 
20 cm deep). In warm and humid climates the material
can also be left on the soil surface as a mulch layer.
How to Choose the Right Species?
There is a large variety of plants, especially legumes,
that can be used as green manure crops. The following
characteristics make an ideal green manure or cover
crop:
< The seeds are cheap, easy to get, to harvest, to store
and to propagate.
< Is adapted to the local growing conditions. 
< Fits into the crop rotation or fits with the main crop
(e.g. fruit trees, coffee, cocoa). 
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
14
Leguminose. The picture shows a plant with nodules
< Possesses a rapid growth rate and be able to cover the
soil in short time.
< Is resistant to pests and diseases.
< Is competitive with undesired spontaneous vegetation
(e.g. aggressive grasses).
< Does not pose a risk of transmitting diseases and pests
to other crops.
< Produces large amounts of organic matter and dry
material.
< Fixes nitrogen from the air and provide it to the soil.
< Has a de-compacting root system and regenerate
degraded soils.
< Is easy to sow and to manage a single crop or associated
with other crops.
< Can be used as fodder, grains as food grains.
An alternative to sowing a green manure or cover crop
in the field is to collect fresh plant material from elsewhere
and work it into the soil as a mulch.
1.2.4 Mulching
Mulching is the process of covering the topsoil with plant
material such as leaves, grass and crop residues. A mulch
cover enhances the activity of soil organisms such as earth-
worms. They help to create a soil structure with plenty of
smaller and larger pores through which rainwater can
infiltrate easily into the soil, thus reducing surface runoff. As
the mulch material decomposes, it increases the content of
organic matter in the soil. Soil organic matter helps to create
good soil with a stable crumb structure. Thus, the soil
particles will not be easily carried away by water. Therefore,
mulching plays a crucial role in preventing soil erosion.
Selection of Mulch Materials
The kind of material used for mulching will greatly influence
its effect. Material that easily decomposes will protect the
soil only for short time, but will provide nutrients to the
crops while decomposing. Hardy materials will decompose
more slowly and therefore cover the soil for a longer time and
protect against erosion. If the decomposition of the mulch
material should be accelerated, animal manures may be spread
on top of the mulch, thus increasing the nitrogen content. 
Sources of mulching material can be the following:
< Cover crops, grass and weeds
< Crop residues (straw etc.)
< Pruning material from trees and hedges
< Wastes from agricultural processing or from forestry.
Constraints of Mulching
< Slugs, snails, ants or termites may find ideal conditions
for living under a mulch layer and can multiply quickly.
They may cause damage to the crops.
< When crop residues are used for mulching, there is 
an increased risk of sustaining pests and diseases.
Damaging organisms such as stem borers may survive
in the stalks of crops like cotton, corn or sugar cane.
Plant material infected with viral or fungal diseases
should not be used if there is a risk that the disease
might spread to the next crop. 
< When carbon rich materials such as straw or stalks are
used for mulching, nitrogen from the soil may be used
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
15
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
Mulch is good for protecting the soil. It should be applied before
the rainy season, with not too thick a layer. 
The application should be done in rows or around single plants
or spread evenly on the filed.
by microorganisms to decompose the material. 
Thus, nitrogen may be temporarily unavailable 
for plant growth if the applied plant material 
does not contain sufficient nitrogen (risk 
of N-immobilization).
< The major constraint for mulching is usually 
the availability of organic material. Its production 
or collection normally involves labor and may 
compete with the production of crops. 
Application of Mulch
< If possible, the mulch should be applied before 
or at the onset of the rainy season, when the soil is
most vulnerable. 
< If the layer of mulch is not too thick, seeds or
seedlings can be directly sown or planted 
in between the mulching material. On vegetable 
plots it is best to apply mulch only after the young 
plants have become somewhat hardier, as they 
may be harmed by the decomposition products 
from fresh mulch material.
< If mulch is applied prior to sowing or planting, the
mulch layer should not be too thick in order to allow
seedlings to penetrate it. Mulch can also be applied 
in established crops, and is best down directly after
digging the soil. It can be applied between the rows,
directly around single plants (especially for tree crops)
or evenly spread on the field. 
1.2.5 Associating Crops and Crop
Rotation
In many traditional agricultural systems, a diversity
of crops in time or space can be found. There are dif-
ferent reasons why farmers do rotate or associate
crops: Different plant species respond to the character-
istics of the soil, have different root systems and have
different needs for nutrients, water, light, temperature
and air. 
Associating Crops
Associating crops is defined as the growing of two or
more crops in the same field at the same time. If suitable
crops are combined, mixed cultivation can lead to a higher
total yield per area. This is basically due to the more
efficient use of space (over and under ground) and
because of beneficial interactions between the mixed
crops. A greater diversity of crops can be grown in the
f ields. This helps the farmer to avoid dependence on
only one crop, ideally achieving a continuous supply of
products from the field. Associating crops have agro-eco-
logical benefits, too:
< The diversity makes it more difficult for pests and
germs to attack a certain species. 
< Mixed cropping with legumes  improves nitrogen 
supply of non-legumes.
< Associated crops cover the soil faster and grow more
densely, thus suppressing weeds more efficiently.
There are different possibilities to associate crops:
< Mixed cropping: Two or more crops are sown at the
same time sharing the same space, or they are sown 
at the same time in neighboring rows. One crop may
also be sown as a border crop.
< Cropping in lines: Two or more crops are sown at 
the same time in neighboring lines with wide spacing.
< Graduate cropping: A second crop is being sown
before the harvest of the first one.
< Combined cultivation of trees and annual crops.
How can mixed cropping be set up? 
< Crops and species grown in association should have
different growth habits and different needs for light:
Crops with strong rooting should be associated or
alternated with crops with a weak root growth. Crops
with deep rooting are best grown together with species
with shallow root growth. The periods of most active
nutrient uptake should not coincide.
< Plant distances should be such that nutrient competition
between plants can be minimized.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
16
< Perennial plants can be well associated with seasonal
plants.
< Leguminous crops may be grown in association with crops
or before crops that have a high demand for nitrogen.
Crop Rotation 
If the same crop is grown for several consecutive years on
the same land yields will normally decline (or more fertilizer
will be needed to reach the same yield) and health problems
will arise in the crop or field. Weeds that are well adapted to
the conditions offered by the crop (e.g. good light conditions,
typical soil cultivation), may spread and require increased
efforts to be controlled. 
Benefits of Crop Rotation:
< When different crops are grown in sequence in the
same field, each crop uses the soil in its own particular
way and thus reduces the risk of nutrient depletion. 
A well-balanced alternation of crop species also 
prevents the development of soil-borne diseases.
Therefore, cultivation pauses must be respected for the
same crop and among crops of the same plant family.
< To avoid the development of persistent weeds, plants
with a slow youth growth should be grown after crops
possessing good weed suppression. A change between
deep and flat rooting crops and between crops building
high stalks and species producing a great leaf mass
that covers the soil quickly also helps to suppress
the weeds.
< Crop rotation is also an important instrument 
to maintain soil organic matter. Ideally, crop rotation
should maintain, or even raise, the content of soil
organic matter. 
1.2.6 Soil and Plant Nutrition
The approach to plant nutrition in organic agriculture is
fundamentally different from the practices of conventional
agriculture. While conventional agriculture aims at providing
direct nutrition to the plants by using mostly easily soluble
chemical fertilizers, organic farming feeds the plants
indirectly by feeding the soil organisms with organic matter.
Organic soil fertility management is based on rational
use of agro ecosystem native resources achieved through
crop rotation, cultivation of legumes, green manures or
deep routing plants and reutilization of organic farm
by-products. Use of auxiliary resources in soil fertility
management, i.e. fertilizers and soil improvers that are not
obtained directly from the agro-ecologic system involved
and are acquired on the market, should only be employed
as a second choice.
Plant Nutrition and Plant Health
Plant nutrition and plant health are closely linked. Chemical
fertilization has the following negative impact on soil and
plant health:
< Chemical fertilization reduces the colonization 
of plant roots with the beneficial root fungus 
mycorrhiza.
< High nitrogen fertilization stops symbiotic nitrogen
fixation by rhizobia.
< Oversupply of nitrogen leads to a softening of the
plants' tissues resulting in plants which are more 
sensitive to diseases and pests.
< The exclusive use of NPK-fertilizers leads to 
a depletion of micro-nutrients in the soil as these 
are not replaced by such fertilizers. This results 
in a decline of yields and a reduction in plant and 
also animal health.
< Decomposition of soil organic matter is enhanced,
which leads to a degradation of the soil structure and 
a higher vulnerability to drought.
Nutrient Supply by Managing Soil Organic Matter
Plant nutrition in organic farming focuses on sound
management of soil organic matter. The organic farmer
uses three approaches to ensure a continuous nutrient
supply from soil organic matter: 
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
17
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
< Varying the Input of Organic Material: The amount
and the quality of organic matter influences the 
content of organic matter in the soil. A regular supply
of organic matter provides the best conditions for 
balanced plant nutrition. Estimates say that in humid
tropical climates 8.5 tones, in sub-humid climate 
4 tones, and in semiarid 2 tones of biomass is needed
per hectare and per year to maintain soil carbon levels
of 2, 1 and 0.5 % respectively. 
< Suitable Crop Rotation: The crops being grown
determine the amount of nutrients the soil needs 
in order to maintain its fertility. The farmer arranges
the rotation in such a way that demand and supply 
of nutrients (e.g. nitrogen from legumes, nutrients
from a green manure crop) fit in the best possible way
(chapter 1.2.5).
< Influencing Nutrient Mobilization: The farmer can
influence the nutrient release from humus by cultivat-
ing the soil at the appropriate time, to the appropriate
depth, and with the appropriate intensity and frequen-
cy (chapter 1.2.2). Soil cultivation improves aeration
of the soil and enhances the activity of soil micro-
organisms. If the micro-organisms find suitable condi-
tions for their growth, they can be very efficient in dis-
solving nutrients and making them available to plants.
Therefore, in organic agriculture, it is important to
encourage plant health by creating biologically
active soil. 
What Do Organic Standards Say on Plant
Nutrition?
IFOAM Basic Standards as well as national regula-
tions and local standards define how plant nutrition
should be approached in organic agriculture and
which materials are allowed, with restrictions and
which are prohibited:
< Biodegradable material builds the basis of the
fertilization program.
< The total amount of biodegradable material
brought onto the farm unit is limited.
< Animal runs should be prevented from becom-
ing over-manured where there is a risk of pollu-
tion to rivers or groundwater.
< Brought-in material shall be in accordance with
a positive list (list of allowed fertilizers).
< No manures containing human excrements can
be used as fertilizer on vegetation for human
consumption if not first sanitized.
< No chemical fertilizers containing nitrogen can
be used; Chilean nitrate and all synthetic
nitrogenous fertilizers, including urea, are pro-
hibited.
< Restricted use of chemical magnesium and
trace elements and/or fertilizers with unwanted
substances, e.g. basic slag, rock phosphate and
sewage sludge. Chemical magnesium and trace
elements shall be used only after soil analysis,
with prior permission of the certifier and as a
supplement to organic sources.
1.2.7 Nutrient Recycling on the Farm
Organic growers aim to achieve a more efficient use of
farm-own nutrients and to reduce external inputs to a
minimum. This idea leads to the concept of closed nutrient
cycles. It is clear that the export of nutrients with market
goods and losses through leaching and volatilization and
erosion cannot be avoided completely. In organic farming,
the big question is: “How to optimize nutrient management
on the farm?” There are three principles of how to optimize
nutrient management.
Principle 1: Minimize Losses
< High losses of nutrients result from leaching due 
to the low exchange capacity of the soil. Leaching 
can be reduced by raising the content of soil organic
matter.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
18
< If dung or compost is kept in water-logged conditions
or is exposed to the sun, high losses of nitrogen may
occur. Washout of soluble nutrients from stored dung
and compost can be prevented by proper sheltering
and storage.
< Dung or compost are often stored in pits where 
water collects during the rainy season. Nitrogen 
gets lost through leaching (if the bottom of the pit 
is permeable) or through volatilization (if the water 
gets logged in the pit).
< Soil erosion robs the soil of its most fertile part: 
the top soil, which contains the majority of nutrients
and organic material. This can be prevented by 
maintaining a dense plant cover and with constructions
such as terracing.
< Avoid burning biomass.
< To prevent losses of nitrogen fixed by leguminous
plants, practice mixed cropping or crop rotation 
with species of high nitrogen demand. 
< Nutrient release from soil organic matter when there
are no plants present or able to take it up leads to 
considerable nutrient losses. 
< Nitrogen is easily lost by volatilization. The highest
losses occur during the first two hours after manure 
is applied to the field. Therefore, farmyard manure
should be applied in the evening as cool night 
temperatures and the higher humidity reduce the 
losses. Farm yard manure and slurry should be
brought out in quantities that the plants can take up 
in a short time. It should be worked into the topsoil
soon after application.
Principle 2: Closed Nutrient Cycles 
< Maximize recycling of plant residues, by-products,
dung and farm wastes. Recycled or saved nutrients
also mean money saved.
< Deep-rooting trees and shrubs planted in spare 
corners collect leached nutrients and can supply 
a great deal of mulch material if intense pruning 
is done.
< Compost can be made out of almost any organic 
material from the farm. It is not only a means 
of recycling nutrients but also increases the exchange
capacity of the soil.
< Mulching is a simple way of recycling nutrients. It helps
to keep moisture in the soil and feeds soil organisms.
< Ashes of stoves are a highly concentrated mixture of
nutrients like potassium, calcium, and magnesium and
may be applied to fields or mixed into the compost.
< Different plants have different requirements for 
nutrients; mixed cropping and crop rotations help 
to optimize the use of nutrients in the soil.
Principle 3: Optimize Inputs
< Introduce external organic “wastes”, if available. Several
cheap organic wastes like coffee husks, sugarcane
bagasse, rice husks, cotton stalks etc. may be available
in the region and could be used to prepare compost.
< Chemicals like rock phosphate or dolomite help to
supply scarce nutrients, and are less prone to leaching
and less harmful to the soil than concentrates.
< Nitrogen fixing plants provide cost-free nitrogen.
They can be planted as cover crops, food grains,
hedges or trees, and also provide firewood, mulch 
and fodder.
Burning Plant Materials – Why is it so
Disadvantageous?
Burning is common in shifting cultivation and in the
process of destroying agricultural wastes, as it saves
labor. The ash contains nutrients, which are directly
available to the plants. However, burning has many
disadvantages:
Large amounts of carbon, nitrogen and sulphur are
released as gas and are therefore lost.
The nutrients in the ash are easily washed out with
the first rain.
Plant materials are too valuable a source of soil
organic matter to be burned.
Burning harms beneficial insects and soil organisms.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
19
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
In organic agriculture, plant materials shall only be
burned as an exception (e.g. crops affected by diseases or
hardy perennial weeds). Instead, they should be used for
mulching or composting.
1.2.8 Composting
Compost is the most important fertilizer in organic agricul-
ture. Organic growers are therefore very much concerned
with producing good compost. Composting is the process
of transforming organic material of plant or animal origin
into humus in heaps or pits. Compared with uncontrolled
decomposition of organic material, decomposition in the
composting process occurs at a faster rate, reaches higher
temperatures and results in a higher quality product. 
Why to Make Compost?
During the composting process, some organic material is
transformed into humic substances that are relatively
resistant to microbial decomposition. Composting thus
helps to maintain or increase soil organic matter content.
The other components of compost provide nutrients and
micro-nutrients in the right proportion (as compost is built
from plant materials) for plants to utilize. Compost has
both a long and short term effect on plant nutrition as
nutrients are permanently released. Due to its neutral pH,
compost improves the availability of nutrients in acid soils.
When mixed with soil, compost can suppress soil borne
disease pathogens. Mature compost is good for plants and
does not impede plant roots and micro-organisms in the
soil as do substances released during a rotting process.
Before starting compost production, the farmers should
take into consideration that during the decomposition
process some organic matter and nutrients will be lost.
Also, compost production is labor intensive and demands
regular attention.
How to Make Good Compost
There are different methods to make compost: There are
“continuous” (continuous supply of raw materials) and
“batchfed” (all material is composted at once) systems. An
“Indore-method” exists as well as “Bokashi”-method and
Vermi-Composting. These methods are successful, taking into
consideration the “ABC´s” on how to make a good compost:
create optimal conditions for fermentation and development
of micro-organisms (for details about the phases of the
composting process please refer to specific literature):
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
20
Compost.
A) Selecting the Primary Materials
The composition of the composting material is of major
importance. The C/N-ratio and the structure of the material
have a major influence on the composting process: Material
that is rich in nitrogen (low C/N-ratio) does not usually con-
tribute to a good structure and thus does not allow for good
aeration if composted separately. Material which has a good
structure usually has a low nitrogen content (high C/N-ratio)
and does not offer enough nitrogen for the bacteria to feed
on. The mixture of different materials should contain an
average C/N-ratio of 30:1. Smaller material must be mixed
with more bulky material. To allow an ideal composting
process, the mixture should consist of approximately:
< One third bulky material with a rich structure
(chopped branches and tree bark, bulky material 
separated from previous composts)
< One third medium to fine material with a high 
C/N-ratio (straw, crop residues etc.)
< One-third fine material with a low C/N-ratio 
(fresh leguminous, manure etc.)
< 5 to 10 % soil.
Material Suitable for Composting:
< Plant material: a balanced mixture of N-rich and 
C-rich material.
< Animal dung: cow, pig (rich in K and P), poultry 
(very rich in P), goat, horse etc.
< Wood ash: contains K, Na, Ca, Mg etc.
< Rock phosphate: the phosphorus binds to the organic
material and is thus less fixed to soil minerals;. 
it is therefore better applied to the compost heap 
than directly to the soil.
< Small quantities of soil, especially soil rich in clay, 
or groundrock improve the composting process and
the quality of the compost. They are mixed with the
other material or used to cover the heap to reduce
nutrient losses. 
Material Not Suitable for Composting:
< Plant material affected by diseases like rust or virus.
< Persistent perennial weeds unless first dried 
in the sun.
< Material with hard prickles or thorns. 
< Waste such as metal or plastic.
B) Setting up a Compost Heap
< Prepare the composting material properly: Chop
coarse woody material to increase its surface area and
encourage decomposition by fungi and bacteria.
< If dry, soak the composting material before mixing it.
< At the bottom of the heap, put twigs and branches to
allow for good drainage of excess water. 
< Pile up coarse carbon rich and nitrogen rich material 
in alternating layers.
< Manure or old compost applied to each layer enhances
the composting process.
< Thin earth layers between the compost help to prevent
nitrogen loss.
< A 10 cm thick cover of straw or leaves in the initial
stage, and an impermeable cover (sacks, plastic sheet
etc.) in the final stage prevent potassium and nitrogen
being washed out of the heap. In dry climates, cover
the heap with a 15 cm thick layer of mud.
< If the heap is not moist enough, from time to time pour
water or liquid manure over the compost.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
21
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
The process of composting. It shows how waste is turned 
into humus.
C) Turning the Compost
Two to three weeks after building up the compost heap, it
will have decreased to about half its original size. This is the
right time to turn it. Turning has a number of advantages:
< Turning the compost helps to accelerate the process. 
< It improves aeration and encourages the process of
composting.
< It ensures that material from the outside of the heap
can decompose properly when placed in the center.
< It allows the quality of the composting process to be
checked and for any non-ideal conditions to be
improved.
Vermi-Composting
Earthworms are highly efficient in transforming
biomass such as leaves into excellent humus. They
usually become very active in a compost heap after the
heating phase. Vermi-Composting is mainly based on
the activity of worms and does not go through a heat-
ing phase at all. As worms transform biomass into
excrement within a short period of time, the process
can be faster than ordinary composting. Worm excre-
ment is stable crumbles of soil closely bound to
organic matter. They have high nutrient levels and
good water retention. In addition, the excrement has a
growth promoting effect on plants. Some experienced
farmers use “vermi-wash”, the liquid collected from
the compost heap after sprinkling, as a leaf fertilizer
and plant tonic. This can even help plants to get rid
of pests (e.g. aphids) and diseases. Worms are very
sensitive to fluctuations in moisture and temperature.
They need a continuous supply of “food”, i.e. compost
material. They are also attacked by ants and termites.
Therefore, a solid base is needed to protect the worms
from predators. To remove the compost, let the top
of the heap dry out so that the worms move to the
deeper layers. Though vermi-compost is definitely a
very good manure, it requires more investment (tank
and worms), labor and permanent care as compared
to ordinary composting methods.
Application of Compost
There is no one definite stage of maturity. Compost ripens
in an endless process. Compost can be used as soon as the
original composting material is not recognizable anymore.
The compost has turned a dark brown or blackish color and
has a pleasant smell.
Compost is a scarce and valuable manure for most
organic farmers. Usually it is not possible to produce
sufficient amounts for fertilizing all fields. Therefore,
farmers should think carefully about where compost
application would be most beneficial. High efficiency is
achieved in nurseries and when planting seedlings or
saplings. Quantities and timing of application depend on
the compost quality and differ from crop to crop; some
examples are explained in the following chapters. 
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
22
Earth Worm working to produce humus.
1.3 Pest and Disease
Management
Pest and disease management in organic agriculture
consists of a range of activities that support each other.
Most management practices are long-term activities that
aim at preventing pests and diseases from affecting a crop.
Management focuses on keeping existing pest populations
and diseases low. Control, on the other hand, is a short-term
activity and focuses on killing pest and disease. The general
approach in organic agriculture is to deal with the causes of
a problem rather than treating the symptoms, an aspect that
also applies to pests and diseases. Therefore, management
is of a much higher priority than control. For details
and examples please consult the following chapters of
this book.
1.3.1 Plant Health and Natural
Defense
A healthy plant is less vulnerable to pest and disease
infestation. Therefore, a major aim for the organic farmer
is to create conditions that keep a plant healthy. In favorable
conditions, the plants own protection mechanisms to fight
infections are sufficient. This is why a well managed
ecosystem can be a successful way of reducing the level
of pest or disease populations. Certain crop varieties have
more effective mechanisms than others, and therefore
have a lower infection risk. The health condition of a plant
depends to a large extent on the fertility of the soil. When
nutrition is well balanced, the plant becomes stronger and
is therefore less vulnerable to infection. If climatic condi-
tions are not suitable, the plant can become stressed.
Stress weakens the defense mechanisms of plants and
makes them easy targets for pests and diseases. One of the
most important points for an organic farmer is therefore to
grow healthy plants. 
Natural Defense Mechanisms
Plants have their own mechanisms for protecting them-
selves against pests and diseases denominated as their
immune system. Some plants have the ability to prevent or
restrict infection by one or several disease or pests. This is
called resistance. The cultivation of resistant varieties is an
important preventive measure in organic farming. There are
several passive and active defense mechanisms of plants:
< a strong smell of aromatic oils or a color which keeps
pests away,
< long or sticky hairs on the leaves which hinder 
insects’ ability to walk or feed on a plant,
< leaves covered with wax which can not be penetrated
easily,
< substances in the leaves which inhibit the pests’ or 
diseases’ metabolism.
Grafting
For perennial plants, grafting is a promising technique for
obtaining resistant plants. It combines a shoot of a high
yielding crop with a rootstock of a variety that is resistant
to soil borne diseases, but fails to grow desired yields. This
technique is applied in coffee, citrus (see chapter 2.1.2) and
many other crops. 
1.3.2 Preventive Measures
Knowledge about plant health and pest and disease ecology
helps the farmer to choose effective preventive crop protec-
tion measures. As many factors influence the development
of pest and disease, it is crucial to intervene at the most
sensitive points. This can be accomplished through the
correct timing of management practices, a suitable combi-
nation of different methods, or the choice of a selective
method. Some important preventive crop protection
measures are the following: 
1) Selection of adapted and resistant varieties: Choose
varieties that are well adapted to the local environmental
conditions (temperature, nutrient supply, pests and
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
23
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
disease pressure), as it allows them to grow healthy and
makes them stronger against infections of pests and
diseases.
2) Selection of clean seed and planting material (certified
seed and planting material from safe sources).
3) Use of suitable cropping systems (see chapter 1.3.3):
Diverse cropping systems, crop rotation, green manuring
and cover crops.
4) Use of balanced nutrient management (see chapter 1.3):
moderate N-fertilization and steady growth makes a
plant less vulnerable to infection. 
5) Input of organic matter (see chapter 1.2): improves soil-
fertility, stabilizes soil structure and supplies substances
that strengthen the plant's own protection mechanisms.
6) Compost can reduce disease problems due to the presence
of micro-organisms. They either compete with pathogens
for nutrients, produce antibiotics that reduce pathogen
survival and growth, or parasite on the pathogens. There
is also an indirect effect on crop health.
7) Application of suitable soil cultivation methods (see
chapter 1.2.2): Regulates weeds that serve as hosts for
pests and diseases.
8) Use of good water management: Flood irrigation and
water on the foliage encourages pathogen infections.
9) Conservation and promotion of natural enemies (see
chapter 1.6.3): Provide an ideal habitat for natural ene-
mies to grow and reproduce.
10) Selection of optimum planting time and spacing (see
e.g. citrus production, chapter 2.1.2): Suff icient
distance between the plants allows good aeration and
reduces the spread of a disease
11) Use of proper sanitation measures: Removes infected
plant parts from the ground to prevent the disease from
spreading, eliminates residues of infected plants after
harvesting.
Treatment of Seeds
Seeds can be treated to control germs attached to the seed
(seed-borne diseases), and/or to protect against pests and
diseases in the soil that can attack seeds, emerging roots or
young seedlings (soil-borne diseases). There are three main
methods for seed treatment in organic farming:
1. Physical: sterilizing by soaking seed in hot water
(typically 50–60 ºC),
2. Botanical: by coating seeds with a layer of plant
extract, such as crushed garlic.
3. Biological: by coating seeds with a layer of antagonistic
fungi. 
When seeds are bought from seed companies, attention
should be paid to the type of treatment they underwent, as
chemical treatment is not permitted in organic farming. 
1.3.3 Curative Crop Protection
Methods
If all preventive crop protection practices fail to sufficiently
prevent economic losses to the farmer, it may be necessary
to take curative action. Curative action means controlling
the pest or disease once it has already infested the crop.
Several options exist in organic agriculture:
1) Biological control with natural predators or antagonistic
microbes.
2) Natural pesticides based on herbal preparations or other
natural products.
3) Mechanical control with traps or hand picking.
Biological Control
Of all the methods and approaches presently used for the
management of pests and diseases, biological control is
by far the most complex and probably the least under-
stood. Bio-control is the use of natural enemies to manage
populations of pests and diseases. This implies that we
are dealing with living systems that are complex and
vary from place to place and from time to time.
Knowledge about and observation of the ecology of
pests and diseases, as well as population dynamics of
pest and predators, are the basis of successful application
of this method.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
24
Natural enemies – the biological control agents – can be
divided into four groups: 
< Predators – such as spiders, lady beetles, ground 
beetles, and syrphid flies – usually hunt or set traps 
to catch a prey to feed on.
< Parasitoids of pests are commonly wasps or flies. 
They are usually smaller than their host and are 
parasitic.
< Pathogens are entomophagous fungi, bacteria, 
or viruses that can infect and kill insects, causing 
a disease in pest organisms. Examples are Bacillus
thuringiensis (Bt), Beauveria bassiana and NPV virus.
Pathogens require specific conditions (e.g. high
humidity, low sunlight) to infect insects and to 
multiply.
< Nematodes are commonly used insect-pathogens.
Some nematodes attack plants (e.g. rootknot 
nematode). Entomopathogenic nematodes attack
insects and are usually only effective against pests 
in the soil or in humid conditions. 
Active populations of natural enemies can effectively
control pest and disease organisms and thus prevent their
mass multiplication. Therefore, the organic farmer should
conserve natural enemies already present in the crop
environment and enhance their impact by:
< Minimizing the application of natural pesticides such
as copper and sulfur (chemical pesticides anyway are
not permitted in organic farming).
< Allow some pests to live in the field that will serve as
food or host for natural enemies.
< Establish a diverse cropping system (e.g. mixed crop-
ping).
< Include host plants providing food or shelter for natu-
ral enemies (e.g. flowers which adult beneficial insects
feed on).
Releasing Natural Enemies
If populations of natural enemies present in the field are too
small to sufficiently control pests, they can be reared in a
laboratory or rearing unit. The reared natural enemies are
released in the crop to boost field populations and keep pest
populations down. There are two approaches to biological
control through the release of natural enemies: 
1) Preventive release of the natural enemies at the
beginning of each season. This is used when the natural
enemies could not persist from one cropping season to
another due to unfavorable climate or the absence of
pests. Populations of the natural enemy then establish
and grow during the season.
2) Releasing natural enemies when pest populations
start to cause damage to crops. Pathogens are usually
used in that way, because they can not persist and
spread in the crop environment without the presence
of a host (“pest”). They are also often inexpensive to
produce.
Using Pathogenes
Natural enemies that kill or suppress pests or diseases are
often fungi or bacteria. They are called antagonists or
referred to as microbial insecticides or bio-pesticides.
Some commonly used antagonistic microbes are (more
examples see following chapters of this book):
< Bacteria such as Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt). Bt has
been available as a commercial microbial insecticide
since the 1960s. Different types of Bt are available for
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
25
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
Biological control is the use of natural enemies to manage 
populations of pests and diseases.
the control of caterpillars and beetles in vegetables 
and other agricultural crops, and for mosquito and
black fly control. 
< Viruses such as NPV (nuclearpolyhedrosis virus) are
effective for control of several caterpillar pest species.
Every insect species, however, requires a specific
NPV-species. An example: The armyworm Spodoptera
exigua is a major problem in shallot production 
in Indonesia. Since experiments showed that SeNPV
(NPV specific for S. exigua) provided better control
than insecticides, farmers have adopted this control
method. Many farmers in West-Sumatra are now 
producing NPV on-farm.
< Fungi that kill insects, such as Beauveria bassiana.
Different strains of this fungus are commercially 
available. For example: strain Bb 147 is used for control
of corn borers (Ostrinia nubilalis and O. furnacaiis) 
in maize, strain GHA is used against whitefly, thrips,
aphids and mealybugs in vegetables and ornamentals.
Several species of fungi can occur naturally in
ecosystems. For example, aphids can be killed by a
green or white colored fungus during humid weather. 
< Fungi that work against plant-pathogens. For example
Trichoderma sp., widely used in Asia for prevention 
of soil-borne diseases such as damping-off and root
rots in vegetables.
< Nematodes such as Steinernema carpocapsae control soil
insects such as cutworms (Agrotis spp.) in vegetables.
Natural Pesticides
In some cases, preventive and bio-control measures are not
sufficient and the damage by a pest or a disease may reach
a level of considerable economic loss. This is when direct
control measures with natural pesticides may become
appropriate. Contrary to conventional farming practices,
where it has become a widely held view that pesticides are
the best and fastest means to reduce pest damage, organic
farmers know that preventive methods are superior and that
only if prevention is not sufficient, natural pesticides
should be applied.
Some plants contain components that are toxic to
insects. When extracted from the plants and applied on
infested crops, these components are called botanical
pesticides or botanicals. The use of plant extracts to control
pests is not new. Rotenone (Derris sp.), nicotine (tobacco),
and pyrethrins (Chrysanthemum sp.) have been used widely
both in small-scale subsistence farming as well as in
commercial agriculture. Most botanical pesticides are
contact, respiratory, or stomach poisons. Therefore, they
are not very selective, but target a broad range of insects.
This means that even beneficial organisms can be affected.
Yet the toxicity of botanical pesticides is usually not very
high and their negative effects on beneficial organisms
can be significantly reduced by selective application.
Furthermore, botanical pesticides are generally highly
bio-degradable so that they become inactive within hours
or a few days. Once again, this reduces the negative impact
on beneficial organisms; botanical pesticides are relatively
environmentally safe.  
Preparation of Neem
The preparation and use of botanicals requires some
know-how, but little material and infrastructures. It
is a common practice under many traditional
agricultural systems. Neem, for example, which is
derived from the neem tree (Azadiracta indica) of
arid tropical regions, contains several insecticidal
compounds. The main active ingredient is azadiractin,
which both deters and kills many species of cater-
pillars, thrips and whitefly. Both seeds and leaves
can be used to prepare the neem solution. Neem
seeds contain a higher amount of neem oil, but
leaves are available all year. A neem solution loses
its effectiveness within approximately 8 hours of
preparation, and when exposed to direct sunlight. It
is most effective to apply neem in the evening,
directly after preparation, under humid conditions
or when the plants and insects are damp. There are
different recipes for the preparation of a neem
solution. One is the Neem seed kernel extract:
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
26
Pound 30 g neem kernels (that is the seed of which
the seed coat has been removed) and mix it in 1 liter
of water. Leave that overnight. The next morning,
filter the solution through a fine cloth and use it
immediately for spraying. It should not be further
diluted. 
Preparation of Pyrethrum
In the tropics, pyrethrum is grown in mountain
areas because it needs cool temperatures to
develop its flowers. Pyrethrins are insecticidal
chemicals extracted from the dried pyrethrum
flower. The flower heads are processed into a
powder to make a dust. This dust can be used
directly or infused into water to make a spray.
Pyrethrins cause immediate paralysis to most
insects. Human allergic reactions are common.
Pyrethrins break down very quickly in sunlight
so they should be stored in darkness. Liquid
formulations are stable in storage but powders
may lose up to 20 percent of their effectiveness in
one year. Attention: Pyrethroids are synthetic
insecticides based on pyrethrins, but more toxic
and longer lasting. They are not allowed in organic
farming! 
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
27
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
The preparation of a Neem solution.
Apart from plant extraction, there are some other
natural pesticides that are allowed in organic farming.
Although some of these products have limited selectivity
and are not fully biodegradable, there are situations when
their use is justified. However, in most cases, the desired
effect is best reached in combination with preventive crop
protection methods5:
< Sulphur: against fungal disease
< Copper: against fungal disease (accumulates 
in the soil and harms soil organisms!)
< Sulphuric acidic argillaceous earth: against 
fungal disease
< Ashes: against soil-borne disease
< Slaked lime: against soil-borne diseases
< Clay: against fungal diseases
< Baking soda: against fungal diseases
< Soft soap solutions: against aphids and other 
sucking insects
< Light mineral oil: against various insect pests 
(harms natural enemies!)
< Sulphur: against spider mites (harms natural 
enemies!)
< Plant ashes: against ants, leaf miners, stem 
borers etc.
5 For detailed information please consult the positive lists of organic
standards and regulations; all allowed substances and products for
pest and disease management are listed there..
1.4 Weed Management
Weeds are plants that grow in places where they are not
wanted or in unwanted periods of the cropping season.
In a f ield, weeds are usually unwanted because they
compete with the crop for water, nutrients, and sunlight
and therefore prevent the crop from an ideal growth.
Weeds may also directly reduce prof its by hindering
harvest operations, lowering crop quality, and by
producing seed or rootstocks that infest the f ield and
affect future crops. 
On the other hand, weeds have a number of benefits:
< Weeds are often useful indicators of soil fertility 
and structure.
< They can serve as host plants for certain beneficial
organisms. 
< Several weeds are edible for farm animals or suitable
for human consumption. 
< Some weeds have a medicinal use. 
< Weeds have taken up nutrients from the soil and 
these can be returned to the soil by using weeds 
as mulch or as green manure. 
< Weeds can help to prevent soil erosion.
Management of Weeds
A basic working principle in organic farming is to prevent
problems, rather than to cure them. This applies equally to
weed management. Good weed management in organic
farming includes creating conditions which hinder weeds
from growing at the wrong time and in the wrong place and
then become a serious problem for the crop cultivation.
Competition from weeds doesn’t harm the crop throughout
the whole cultivation period in the same way. The most
sensitive phases of a crop with reference to weed competi-
tion is in its early growth and harvest stages. Organic weed
management measures aim to keep the weed population at
a level that doesn’t result in economic loss of the crop culti-
vation or harm its quality. 
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
28
Preventive Measures and Suppression of Weeds
Several preventive measures may be applied at the same
time. The importance and effectiveness of the different
methods depend to a large extent on the weed species and
the environmental conditions. However, some methods are
very effective for a wide range of weeds and are therefore
regularly used:
1) Living Green Cover (see chapter 1.2.3): The cover
competes successfully with the weeds for light, nutri-
ents, and water and therefore helps, especially in peren-
nial crops, to prevent weed growth by winning the
competition for resources. 
2) Mulching (see chapter 1.2.4): the weeds find it difficult
to receive enough light to grow and may not be able to
pass through the mulch layer. Dry, hardy material, that
decomposes slowly, keeps its effect longer than fresh
mulch material.
3) Crop Rotation: Rotation of crops is the most efficient
measure to regulate seed and root weeds in annual
crops. Changing the conditions of the crop interrupts
the living conditions of the weeds thus inhibiting their
growth and spread. 
4) Sowing Time and Density: Weed pressure during the
critical period (youth stage of the crop) can be reduced
by choosing an optimal sowing time and by increasing
sowing density.
5) Balanced Fertilization: it can support an ideal growth of
the crop, which promotes the growth of the crop over
the weeds.
6) Soil Cultivation: weed cures before sowing, apply
superficial stubble treatment works against persisting
weeds under dry weather conditions. Minimum-tillage
systems can increase the weed pressure.
7) Prevent Dissemination of weeds by eliminating them
before seed dispersal.
8) Prevent Insemination of weeds by avoiding the
introduction of weed seeds into the f ields through
tools or animals and by using only weed free seed
material.
Mechanical Control
With the necessary preventive measures, weed density can
be reduced, but it will hardly be enough during the critical
periods of the crop at the beginning of cultivation.
Therefore, mechanical methods remain an important part
of weed management. 
Manual weeding is probably the most important one.
As it’s very labor intensive, reducing weed density method
in the field as much as possible will bring less work later
on, and should therefore be aimed for. Using the right tool
can increase work efficiency significantly.
Flame weeding is another option: Plants are heated
briefly to 100°C and higher. This provokes coagulation of
the proteins in the leaves and a bursting of their cell walls.
Consequently, the weed dries out and dies. Although it is an
effective method, it is quite expensive, as it consumes a
large amount of fuel gas and needs machinery. It is not
effective against root weeds.
Organic growers apply a specific combination of pre-
ventive and mechanical control methods for each crop.
Some examples are explained in the following chapters. 
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
29
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
1.5 Seeds and Planting Material
The use of adapted varieties and quality seeds and transplant
is essential for good harvest in organic farming. Organic
producers strive to use organic seeds and transplants, and are
required to do so. International organic standards already
require the use of organic seeds and transplants, provided
these are available. From 1 January 2004, organic seeds and
transplants must be exclusively used in the European Union. 
Producers also use them because they desire to avoid
genetic engineering completely, and because they need
plants that are adapted to organic farming conditions.
1.5.1 Conservation Varieties and 
On-farm Propagation
Organic agriculture strives to extend the scope of con-
servation varieties to old varieties and landraces, as well as
new varieties/populations for small areas and special pur-
poses. This is of interest for the authenticity of regional,
organic products. New can mean either selections out of old
varieties, or a “changed” old variety through on-farm manage-
ment of conservation, or a population of old varieties
mixed/crossed with modern lines. 
1.5.2 What Do the Standards Say?
General principles of the IFOAM Basic Standards
regarding seeds and plant material: All seeds and plant
material should be certified organic. Species and varieties
cultivated should be adapted to the soil and climatic conditions
and be resistant to pests and diseases. When choosing varieties
genetic diversity should be taken into consideration. 
Other Private Label Standards
When organic seed and plant materials are available, they
should be used. Most certification body and standard set-
ting organizations (producer organizations, authorities) set
time limits for the requirement of certified organic seed and
other plant material. 
When certified organic seed and plant materials are not
available, chemically untreated conventional materials may
be used. Where no other alternatives are available, chemically
treated seed and plant material may be used. The certification
body/ standardizing organization shall define conditions
for exemptions and set time limits for any use of chemically
treated seeds and plant materials. The use of genetically
engineered seeds, pollen, trans-gene plants or plant material
is not permitted.
1.5.3 www.organicXseeds.com –
More than 3500 Products
Online
At present, it is very diff icult to f ind seeds and
transplants of organic quality. The aim of the database
organicXseeds.com is to transparently display the current
availability status of this rare merchandise. Each producer,
consultant and inspector should be able to receive informa-
tion quickly and efficiently regarding European suppliers
of organic GM-free seeds.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
30
Growing containers for young plants for trees.
www.organicXseeds.com considerably simplif ies
the search for organic seeds and transplants. This
Website is open to the public and is free. The two
search options (quick search and advanced search)
enable the user to precisely search the up-to-date avail-
ability of e.g. organic salad seed or apple standard tree.
As search results, you will receive a list of available
varieties and their suppliers in Europe. Some suppliers
allow you to request a quote directly by e-mail as a
further service.
On one hand, the database serves as a fast and informa-
tive instrument for organic producers to search for organic
seeds and transplants. On the other hand, organicXseeds
allows suppliers to provide their clientele with up-to-date
information on the availability of their products, in a way
that is also very effective for advertising purposes.
Interested suppliers can apply online and contract with
BioGene (see below) on the terms and conditions for the
presentation of their products on the web. Subsequently, the
suppliers can register their seed range online. The principal
information in the database concerns the availability of the
seed. The company can update its information if their seed
program has changed. In this way, the seed inventory
remains always up-to-date. Suppliers pay an annual  fee of
100 Euro.
At present, more than 3500 products of over 104 seed
suppliers from 10 countries are listed. The range of products
covers amongst others cereals, vegetables, fruits, spices,
fodder crops and ornamentals
Currently, Soil Association in co-operation with NIAB
collects the data of all the British seed suppliers and their
seed program. Hence, the whole British offering of organic
seeds and transplants is available online on the database
organicXseeds.com! In the near future, the database shall
be used as a control tool, too. 
1.5.4 Organic Plant Breeding
Techniques
Seeds form the basis for agricultural production, but most
organic growers know little about how their seedstocks
have been produced. Within the organic movement the
discussion on the compatibility of plant breeding tech-
niques has been accelerated by the public discussion on
genetic engineering. This decision-making is important
in the development of a framework for organic plant
breeding and in facilitating investments by breeding
companies.
It is important that breeding, multiplication, and
maintenance techniques are identified and examined to
assess their compatibility with the technical, ethical and
environmental objectives of organic agriculture. This
process will assist the ongoing national and international
discussions on this topic and will also be of value in light
of the requirement for all organic producers to use organic
seed by 2004 (EU Regulation 2092/91; see above).
The issue of plant breeding techniques and their
compatibility with organic farming is complex due to the
range of techniques available, balanced against the differ-
ent demands for variety and crop performance. Appropriate
organic plant breeding will serve to develop improved 
varieties for organic systems without jeopardizing the ethical
and environmental integrity of organic agriculture.
Currently, only the use of varieties obtained by genetic
engineering is forbidden in organic agriculture across
Europe (EU Regulation 2092/91). The regulation also
requires that parent plants of annual crops have to be grown
at least one generation under organic conditions, while
biannual plants and perennials have to be grown for at least
two generations under organic conditions. Guidelines for
determining the appropriateness of breeding and multipli-
cation techniques for organic breeding are formulated in
the FiBL-dossier “Plant Breeding Techniques”.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
31
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
Until now, organic farmers have made use of these tra-
ditionally bred varieties but the question being asked more
and more regularly is "do these varieties truly fulfill the
needs of organic production?" Are the seeds and vegetative
multiplication material, usually results of traditional and
conventional breeding programs, adapted to the conditions
of organic agriculture? And, what do consumers expect
from an organic variety? Healthy, tasty, and unique prod-
ucts? Furthermore, the quality of organic products is not
simply determined by what they are, but also by taking into
account how these crops have been produced. This aspect
should also be considered when judging breeding lines for
agricultural and horticultural production.
How Plant Breeding and Multiplication Works
In general, plant breeding can be described as the
total of activities to improve the genetic properties
of a cultivated crop. A breeder develops a new
variety with one or more specific aims. Therefore,
he has to search for parental plants (other varieties
or wild relatives) with the desired traits. To obtain
plants with the combination of desired characteristics,
the breeder makes crosses with the parental plants.
The result of a cross is a large number of seeds with
different genetic make-ups (population). In the next
plant generations, the breeder has to select for
individual plants with the best combinations. To
facilitate selection he has different techniques
available, the choice of which will  depend on the
crop (self pollinator, cross pollinator, or plant with
vegetative multiplication) and the traits he selects.
In official field trials, the usefulness of the new vari-
eties will be compared to existing standard vari-
eties. If the new variety is distinguishable from all
other varieties and its appearance is uniform and
stable enough over time, the breeder will maintain
and multiply it for the market.
1.6 Management of Semi-natural
Habitats
For hundreds of years, agriculture has contributed sub-
stantially to the diversity of species and habitats, and has
formed many of today’s landscapes. Over the last century,
however, modern intensive agriculture, with its high
input of synthetic pesticides, fertilizers and monocrop
specialization, has been detrimental to the diversity of
genetic resources of crop varieties and livestock breeds.
This has also adversely affected the diversity of wild flora
and fauna species and the diversity of ecosystems.
Organic farming is dependent upon stabilizing
agro-ecosystems, maintaining ecological balances,
developing biological processes to their optimum and
linking agricultural activities with the conservation of
biodiversity. Wild species perform a variety of ecological
services within organic systems: pollination, pest control,
maintenance of soil fertility. Thus, higher levels of bio-
diversity can strengthen farming systems and practices.
By respecting the natural capacity of plants, animals
and the landscape, organic agriculture aims to optimize
quality in all aspects of agriculture and the environment.
Biological pest control on organic farms, for example,
relies on maintaining healthy populations of pest pred-
ators. Organic agriculture is thus committed to the
conservation and enhancement of biodiversity within
agricultural systems, both from a philosophical per-
spective and from the practical viewpoint of maintaining
productivity.
Biodiversity in organic farming is generally assessed at
four distinct levels:
1. Diversity of Genetic Resources (the variation between
individuals and between populations within a species):
Higher crop diversity on organic farms, integrating ani-
mal husbandry with crop production, using vast and
diverse rotations, intercrops and green cover crops etc
(see chapters above).
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
32
2. Species Diversity (the different types of plants, animals
and other life forms within a region or community):
Floral diversity contributes to ecosystem stability whilst
the invertebrate community associated with field
boundaries performs many ecosystem functions including
biological control of pests and diseases, pollination and
food resource for higher trophic levels. The higher
floral diversity in organic arable fields is generally due
to the ban of synthetic N-fertilizers and herbicides.
Flowering plants are also important for the diversity of
pollinators (butterflies, bees and wasps) and many
beneficial arthropods such as predators and parasitoids.
Hedges and other semi-natural habitats enhance faunal
diversity are and therefore an important element in
organic crop systems. Many bird species feed on
insects, and may thus also contribute to a better natural
pest control. Further, organic growers promote earth-
worms through the application of organic matter and
green manure practices. Earthworm casts greatly help
to improve soil structure providing high concentration
of nutrients in an accessible form to plants. 
3. Ecosystem Diversity (the variety of habitats found
within an area): Organic farming aims to contribute
beneficially to ecosystems and facilitate biodiversity
and nature conservation (IFOAM standards). The
conservation and the management of semi-natural
habitats plays an important role in organic farming.
Semi-natural habitats are refuges for endangered plant
species that, in former times, were found in meadows
and arable f ields: hedges, solitary shrubs, trees,
low-input orchards, ponds, corridors, habitat networks,
wildlife refuges and devices. Semi-natural habitats and
field margins are also essential for the survival of many
invertebrates, especially due to favorable food and
overwintering conditions. They also function as habitat
cross-links between meadows, fallows and different
field margins. The improvement of landscape infra-
structure in combination with organic farming may be
an important factor for the conservation and enhancement
of species-rich communities on agricultural land.
4. Buffer Zones: A secondary and closely connected link
between ecosystem diversity, protected area management
and organic farming is in the buffer zones. Buffer zones
are areas where land management aims to help maintain
the integrity of the ecosystem. The use of organic farming
in protected buffer zones has been explored in the Meso-
American Biological Corridor, a projected complex of
protected areas and sustainable management stretching
over seven countries. The initiative envisages a range of
sustainable land uses within the buffer zones and
linking areas, including certified forest management
and organic agriculture.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
33
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
1.7 Livestock Husbandry
Integrating animal husbandry into crop producing farms is
one of the principles of organic farming. In temperate and
arid zones, animal husbandry plays an important role in the
recycling of nutrients, while it is less emphasized in the
humid tropics. The caring, training, and nurturing of
animals is considered an art in many farming communities.
Animal husbandry in organic farming are both differentiation
extensive animal husbandry, which is often environmentally
damaging (e.g. overgrazing of common lands), and from
intensive animal husbandry, which keeps animals under
ethically unacceptable conditions.
1.7.1 Keeping Animals
Many farm animals have a multi-functional role. They can:
< Produce dung which is of great importance for soil
fertility.
< Yield continuously products such as milk or eggs 
for sale or own consumption.
< Recycle by-products such as straw or kitchen waste.
< Serve as draught animals for tillage or transport.
< Produce meat, hides, feathers, horns etc.
< Serve as an investment or a bank.
< Help in pest control (e.g. dugs) and weed management
(e.g. grazing on barren fields).
< Have cultural or religious significance (prestige, 
ceremonies etc.).
< Produce young stock for breeding or sale.
What Animals Need
Organic farmers try to achieve healthy farm animals that
can produce satisfactorily over a long period of time. To
achieve this goal, various needs of farm animals have to be
considered:
< Fodder in adequate quality and quantity; for non-
ruminants: diversity in fodder is usually required.
< Sufficient access to clean drinking water.
< Clean sheds of sufficient size and with adequate 
light and fresh air.
< Sufficient freedom to move around and perform their
natural behavior.
< Healthy conditions and veterinary follow up, 
if needed.
< Sufficient contact with other animals, but no stress 
due to overcrowding.
< For herd animals: an appropriate age and sex 
distribution within the herd.
There is a range of standards in detail, regulating the
organic management, shedding, feeding, veterinary
treatment, breeding, purchase, transport, and slaughter of
farm animals. The IFOAM Basic Standards say: “Organic
animal husbandry means not only feeding organic food and
avoiding synthetic food additives, but also putting a focus
on satisfying the various needs of the farm animals. Good
health and welfare of the animals is among the main objec-
tives. Suffering due to mutilations, permanent tethering or
isolation of herd animals must be avoided as much as pos-
sible. For various reasons, landless animal husbandry (i.e.
fodder purchased from outside the farm, no grazing land) is
not permitted in organic farming.”
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
34
Integrating animal husbandry into crop producing farms is one 
of the principles of organic farming.
How Many Animals to Keep? 
In order to identify the appropriate number for a specific
kind of animal on a farm, the following points should be
considered:
< Availability of fodder on the farm, 
especially in periods of scarcity 
(e.g. dry season).
< Carrying capacity of pastures.
< Size of existing or planned sheds.
< Maximum amount of manure the fields 
can bear.
< Availability of labor for looking after 
the animals.
In tropical countries, farm animals are frequently found
to be underfed. When defining the number of farm animals,
keep in mind that the economic benefit will be higher when
fewer animals are kept, but fed well. Not only the amount,
but also the quality of the available food must be taken into
consideration.
Sheds 
With the exception of nomadic lifestyles, most farm
animals are temporarily kept in sheds. The combination of
animal husbandry and farm activities requires control of
their movements so as to avoid damage to crops. For the
welfare and health of the animals, sheds must be cool and
aerated, and protect from rain. They should be constructed
in a way ensuring:
< Sufficient space to lie down, stand up, move and
express natural behavior (e.g. licking, scratching etc.).
< Sufficient light (as a rule, one should be able to read 
a newspaper in the shed).
< Protection from sunlight, rain, and extreme 
temperatures.
< Sufficient aeration, but no draught.
< Appropriate beddings (see section below).
< Elements to exercise natural behavior (e.g. for poultry:
perching rails, sand baths and secluded laying nests).
< Sheltered pits or heaps to collect and store manure.
For economic reasons, sheds can be built with simple,
locally available materials. Many countries have a rich
tradition of shed constructions, and have developed the
most efficient and appropriate shed systems for the conditions
of the region. If techniques of this heritage are combined
with the above principles, a locally adapted and at the same
time animal friendly system may be obtained.
Beddings are used in sheds for keeping the floor soft,
dry, and clean, which is important for animal health. They
absorb the excrements of the animals and need to be
replaced from time to time. Beddings can be of straw,
leaves, twigs, husks or other locally available material.
They can be replaced daily or kept for several months while
adding fresh material on top.
1.7.2 Feeding Animals
The availability of fodder is one of the limiting factors
in animal husbandry. Unlike landless systems in con-
ventional farming, organic husbandry should be mainly
based on the fodder produced on the farm itself. As is
the case with humans, there is a direct link between the
quantity and composition of the food and the health status
of the animals.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
35
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
Free range for the animals.
Food Requirements of Animals
A balanced diet will keep an animal healthy and productive.
The appropriate quantity and the mix of feed items will of
course depend on the type of animal, but also on its main
use (e.g. chicken for meat or egg production, cattle for
milk, meat or draft etc.). In milk production for example,
cows producing milk should be given fresh grass and
possibly other feed items of sufficient protein content. On
the same diet, draught animals would rapidly become
exhausted. Whether or not a farm animal receives the
appropriate amount and kind of fodder usually can be seen
by the shine of its hair or feathers. 
For ruminants, a majority of the fodder should consist
of roughage (grass, leaves). If concentrates or supplements
are used (e.g. agricultural by-products and wastes), they
should not contain growth promoters and other synthetic
substances. Instead of buying expensive concentrates, there
are a variety of leguminous plants rich in protein which can
be grown in the farm as cover crop, hedges or trees. If
mineral content in the available fodder is not sufficient to
satisfy the animal's requirements, mineral salt bricks or
similar feed supplements can be used as long as they do not
contain synthetic additives.
Grazing Versus Shed Feeding
In many regions of the tropics, favorable periods with
abundant fodder alternate with less favorable periods when
there is almost nothing to feed to the animals. However,
keeping animals means providing fodder throughout the
year. Fodder can be produced on the farm as grazing land
or as grass or tree crops used for cutting. While grazing
requires less labor than shed feeding, more land is needed
and appropriate measures to keep the animals away from
other crops must be undertaken. Grazing may lead to a lower
productivity (milk, meat) but usually is the more favorable
option concerning health and welfare of the animals. Shed
keeping, however, has the advantage that the dung can be
easily collected, stored, or composted and applied to the
crops. Whether grazing or shed feeding is the more suitable
option will mainly depend on the agro-climatic conditions,
the cropping system, and the availability of land. A combi-
nation of shed feeding and grazing in a fenced area may be
an ideal combination of high productivity and animal
friendly husbandry. In extensive grasslands of semi-arid
areas, however, grazing may be the only suitable option. 
In most smallholder farms, fodder cultivation will
compete for space with the cultivation of crops. There are
some options for integrating fodder crops in farms without
sacrificing much land:
< Grass or leguminous cover crops in tree plantations 
< Grass fallows or green manures in the crop rotation
< Hedges of suitable shrubs
< Shade or support trees
< Grass on bunds against soil erosion
< Crops with by-products such as paddy straw 
or pea leaves.
Management of Pastures
The management of pastures is crucial for a good herd
management. Overgrazing is probably the most significant
threat to grass land. Once the protective grass cover is
destroyed, the top soil is prone to erosion. Degraded
pastures or land with little plant cover are diff icult to
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
36
Animal incorporation in organic production.
re-cultivate. Therefore, it is important that the use and
intensity of grazing on a particular piece of land is appro-
priate to its production capacity. Sufficient time must be
given to a pasture to recover after intensive grazing.
Fencing off of areas and rotation of the grazing animals on
several pieces of land is a suitable option. This will also
reduce the incidence of infection from parasites encoun-
tered while the animals graze. In some cases it may be
worth considering tilling the grazing site and sow grass
varieties that are more appropriate to the animals' needs
1.7.3 Animal Health 
Disease causing germs and parasites are present almost
everywhere. Like humans, animals have an immune system
that is usually able to cope with these germs. And as with
humans, the eff iciency of the immune system will be
disturbed if animals are not properly fed, can not practice
their natural behavior, or are under social stress.
Health is a balance between disease pressure (the presence
of germs and parasites) and the resistance (immune system
and self healing forces) of the animal. The farmer can
influence both sides of this balance: reduce the quantity of
germs by maintaining good hygiene, and strengthen the
animal's ability to cope with germs.
Organic animal husbandry puts its focus on improving the
living conditions of animals and on strengthening their immune
systems. Of course: if an animal becomes ill it must be treated.
But the farmer should also think about why the immune system
of the animal was not able to fight off the disease or the parasite
attack. Additionally the farmer should think of ways to
improve the animal’s living conditions and hygiene in order to
strengthen it.
Prevention Before Curing
Similar to crop health, organic animal husbandry puts the
main emphasis on preventive measures in order to keep ani-
mals healthy, rather than on curative methods: 
< This starts from keeping robust breeds rather than 
high performing but very susceptible ones. 
< Next, the conditions in which the animals are kept
should be optimal ones: sufficient space, light and 
air, dry and clean bedding, frequent exercise 
(e.g. grazing) and proper hygiene. 
< The quality and quantity of fodder is of crucial 
importance for the health of the animal. Instead 
of feeding commercial concentrates that make 
animals grow faster and produce more, a natural 
diet appropriate to the requirements of the animal
should be achieved.
Where these preventive measures are taken, animals
will rarely fall sick. Thus, veterinary treatment should play
only a secondary role in organic farming. If treatment is
necessary, alternative medicine based on herbal and tradi-
tional remedies should be used. Only if these treatments fail
or are not sufficient, then synthetic medicines (e.g. antibi-
otics) may be used.
Veterinary Treatment
The main principle for veterinary treatment in organic ani-
mal husbandry is: get to know the causes of (or factors that
favor) diseases in order to enhance the natural defense
mechanisms of the animal and to prevent its manifestations
(see above).
What the Organic Standards say on Veterinary
Medicine
Unlike in crop production, synthetic means are per-
mitted to cure sick animals if alternative treatment is
not sufficient. Here, reducing the suffering of the
animal is given priority over the renunciation of
chemicals. However, the standards clearly demand
that priority be given to management practices
which encourage the resistance of the animals, thus
preventing the outbreak of a disease. Therefore, an
outbreak of a disease should be considered as an
indicator that the conditions under which the animal
is kept are not ideal. The farmer should try to
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
37
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
identify the cause (or causes) of the disease and pre-
vent future outbreaks by changing management
practices. If conventional veterinary medication is
applied, withholding periods must be adhered to
before the animal products can be sold as “organic”.
This shall ensure that organic animal products are
free from residues of antibiotics etc. Synthetic
growth promoters are not allowed under any cir-
cumstances.
Controlling Parasites with Herbal Remedies
Herbal medicines are widely used in many countries. Some
traditional farming communities possess a vast knowledge
of local plants and their healing properties. Plants can
definitely support the healing process, even if they do not
directly eliminate the germ of the disease. Still, farmers
should not forget to identify the cause of the disease and
also to  re-think their management practices. For parasite
problems, changing the living conditions or the management
of pastures will be more effective in the long run than any
treatment. One example to use a herbal remedy against
parasites is sweet flag (Acorus calamus). This plant grows
both in tropical as well as subtropical regions and is found
on the banks of rivers and lakes and in swampy ditches or
marshes. The powdered dried rhizomes (thick root parts)
act as an effective insecticide against fowl lice, fleas and
house flies. Caution! Herbal remedies against parasites can
also have a toxic effect on the farm animals! Therefore, it is
important to know the appropriate dose and application
method!
1.7.4 Breeding in Organic Animal
Husbandry
As preventive measures for maintaining good animal health are
of considerable relevance in organic farming, the selection of
breeds suitable to local conditions and to organic feeding is of
crucial importance. This requires that suitable breeds are avail-
able. Traditional breeds of farm animals may be a good starting
point for organic animal breeding. Animals can be improved by
selection of individuals especially suitable for organic con-
ditions. They can be crossbred with suitable new breeds, thus
achieving an animal with the positive aspects of traditional
breeds and the satisfying production of the new breeds.
For breeding, organic farming uses natural reproduction
techniques. While artificial insemination is allowed, embryo
transfer, genetic manipulation, and hormonal synchronization
are not permitted according to organic standards.
Breeding Goals
Over the last decades, traditional breeds have been replaced
by high performing ones in many regions. Similar to high
yielding plant varieties, these new breeds usually depend
on a rich diet (concentrates) and optimal living conditions.
As high performing breeds in general are more susceptible
to diseases than traditional varieties, they need frequent
veterinary interventions. Thus, these new breeds might not
be the right choice for small farmers, as the costs of food
concentrates and veterinary treatment are too high compared
with what can be earned by selling the products.
Breeding activities should attempt to optimize the overall
performance of the animal, taking into consideration the
different goals of an organic farmer. For example, a poultry
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
38
Feeding of Animals.
breed suitable for organic smallholder farms might not be
the highest egg producer, but one in which meat production
is good, and kitchen wastes and whatever is available on the
farm yard can be used as feed. Suitable cattle breeds would
produce sufficient milk and meat while feeding mainly on
roughage and farm by-products (e.g. straw), and be of high
fertility and good resistance against diseases; if required,
they can also be used for draught and transport.
Maximum Performance or Life Production?
When comparing the production of different breeds
of cows, usually only the production per day or year
is taken into consideration. However, high performing
breeds usually have a shorter life span than tradi-
tional ones with lower production. The life milk
production of a cow giving, for example, 8 liters per
day, but over 10 years, therefore would be greater
than one of a high-breed cow yielding 16 liters per
day, but dies after 4 years. As the investments
involved in a milk producing cow are quite high, i.e.
the rearing and feeding of a calf or the purchase of
an adult cow, continuous production over a long life
span should be of great interest to the farmer. This
should be reflected in the breeding goals, which
so far mainly focus on the maximum short term
production. 
1.8 Water Conservation and
Irrigation
Scarcity of water for agriculture is a common phenomenon
in tropical countries. In some regions it is almost impossible
to grow crops without irrigation. Even in areas with large
amounts of rainfall in the rainy season, crops may be short
of water during dry periods. Organic farming aims to
optimize the use of on-farm resources and the sustainable
use of natural resources. Active water retention, water
harvesting and storing of water, therefore, are especially
important topics for organic farmers. 
Keeping the Water in the Soil
In conventional agriculture, the first idea to overcome
water storage is usually to install irrigation facilities.
Organic farmers know that it is more important to first
improve the water retention and the infiltration of water
into the soil. The ability of a soil to absorb and store water
largely depends on the soil composition and on the content
of organic matter. Soil organic matter acts as a storage of
water, just like a sponge. Soils rich in clay can store up to
three times more water than sandy soils. 
While it is not possible to increase the clay content
with agricultural techniques, soil organic matter may be
increased through appropriate management. To increase the
content of organic matter, the application of organic
manures, compost, mulch or green manure can be used as
described in chapter 1.2.3 and 1.2.4. A thin layer of mulch
can considerably reduce the evaporation of water from
the soil. It shades the soil from direct sunlight and prevents
the soil from getting too warm. Shallow digging of the
dry top soil can help to reduce the drying up of the soil
layers beneath. 
Attention!! 
A green manure or cover crop is not always a suitable way
of reducing evaporation from the soil. While a plant cover
provides shade and thus reduces sunshine directly reaching
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
39
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
the soil, they are themselves evaporating water through
their leaves even more efficiently than mere soil. When
soil moisture becomes scarce, plants competing for water
with the main crop can be pruned or cut down, thus serving
as mulch.
Harvesting Water
During strong rains, only a part of the water filters into the
soil. A considerable part flows away as surface runoff, thus
being lost for the crop. In order to get as much of the avail-
able rainwater into the soil, the infiltration of rainwater
needs to be increased. Most important for achieving a high
infiltration is to maintain good topsoil structure containing
many cavities and pores, e.g. from earthworms. Cover
crops and mulch application are suitable for creating such a
favorable top soil structure. Further, they help to slow down
the flow of water, thus allowing more time for the infiltra-
tion.
On slopes, the infiltration of rainwater can additionally
be encouraged through trenches dug along contour lines.
Surface runoff is caught in the trench where it can slowly
infiltrate into the soil. Semi-circular bunds, e.g. around tree
crops, have a similar effect. They collect water that is flowing
down the slope and encourage its infiltration near the root
zone of the crop. On level fields, plant pits can be used. The
effect of these “water traps” can be increased if a layer of
mulch is also integrated.
Excess water in the rainy season may be used during
dry periods. There are many possibilities for storing rain-
water for irrigation, but most of them are labor intensive
or costly. Storing water in ponds has the advantage that
fish may be grown, but water is likely to be lost through
infiltration and evaporation. The construction of water
tanks may avoid these losses, but needs appropriate
construction materials. To decide whether or not to
build water storage infrastructure, the benefits should
be weighed against the costs, including the loss of
arable land.
Crop Selection
The major factors that determine the necessity of irrigation
are the selection of crops and an appropriate cropping
system. Obviously, not all crops (and not even all varieties
of the same crop) require the same amount of water, and not
all need water over the same period of time. Some crops
are very resistant to drought while others are highly
susceptible. Deep rooting crops can extract water from
deeper layers of soil and hence they are less sensitive to
temporary droughts.
With the help of irrigation, many crops can be grown
nowadays outside their typical agro-climatic region. This
may bring about not only the above mentioned negative
impacts, but also some advantages. It may make it possible
to cultivate land which would otherwise be unsuitable
for agriculture without irrigation. Or the cultivation of
sensitive crops can be shifted into areas with less pest or
disease pressure.
The Impact of Irrigation
Even in organic agriculture, large areas of land nowadays
are under irrigation. While the opportunity for irrigation
may help farmers to improve their income and livelihood,
there are also some potential negative impacts of irrigated
agriculture:
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
40
A type of drip irrigation.
< When the amount of water extracted from a lake, 
river or groundwater table exceeds its replenishment, 
depletion of the water resource can be the result, 
with its well known impact on the eco-system.
< Excessive irrigation in dry or semi-arid areas can
cause salinity of the soil, which in the worst case 
can make the soil unsuitable for agriculture.
< Intense irrigation can cause soil erosion.
< Irrigation by sprinkling or flooding can harm the
structure of the topsoil. The crumb structure of the soil
may be destroyed and soil particles may accumulate 
in the pores, resulting in the formation of a hard crust.
This will reduce the aeration of the soil and harm the
soil organisms. 
< Improper irrigation may cause stress to the crops, making
them more vulnerable to pests and diseases. Most dry
land crops are affected by water logging even if it is 
of short duration. Application of irrigation water during 
the hot period of the day can cause a shock to plants.
Water Saving Irrigation Systems
There are irrigation systems of higher or lower efficiency
and with more or less negative impact. If irrigation is
necessary, organic farmers should carefully select a system
that does not overexploit the water source or harm the soil
and has no negative impact on plant health. One promising
option is drip irrigation systems. From a central tank, water
is distributed through thin perforated pipes directly to the
single crop plants. There is a continuous but very light flow
of water, thus allowing sufficient time to infiltrate in the
root zone of the crops. In this way, a minimum of water is
lost and the soil is not negatively affected.
The establishment of drip irrigation systems can be
quite costly. However, some farmers have developed low
cost drip irrigation systems from locally available materials.
Whatever irrigation system the farmer chooses, he will
reach higher efficiency if it is combined with accompanying
measures for improving the soil structure and the water
retention of the soil, as described above.
1.9 Agroforestry 
Agroforestry is one of the best uses of agro-biodiversity
that also generates multiple benefit, including erosion control
and moisture retention (see chapter 1.6). In many tropical
countries certified organic products are produced successfully
in agroforestry systems. The system includes a diversity of
cash and subsistence crops (e.g. bananas, coffee, cocoa,
pineapple, yams, beans) as well as livestock. Cattle and
pigs are kept in stables (“zero grazing”) and the manure is
recycled, providing fertility. The home gardens are
designed to maximize diversity. Elaborate patterns of
vertical zonation provide a range of sunny and cooler
conditions for different species.
Tropical Rainforests and Agro-ecosystems
Tropical rainforests are complex and dynamic ecosystems
that are optimally adapted to the prevailing site conditions.
The vast diversity of species is important for the stability of
the system. Each individual occupies an appropriate niche
and thereby fulfils a particular eco-physiological function
within the system. The so-called diseases and pests in these
systems are nothing but necessary regulation mechanisms
that take their turn when there are tensions within the
system. The function of the so-called weeds is to occupy
niches since natural systems always strive to cover bare soil
as quickly as possible with a plant cover. 
The more complexly designed an agro-ecosystem is,
the fewer interventions required to regulate diseases and
pests in the system. Massive problems with pests and
diseases point to errors in the system that should not be
fought, but corrected. Apart from agronomic considerations,
the successful development of sustainable systems incor-
porating cash and subsistence crops requires that further
principles of forest dynamics be taken into account. 
Forest Dynamics
Where clearfelling or the collapse of a giant tree has
damaged or removed part of the forest canopy, this gap will
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
41
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
quickly be closed under natural conditions. The forest
“organism” passes through a number of phases in this
process that can be compared to the metamorphosis of
an insect that only obtains its f inal form as an adult
“individual” after shedding its skin and changing its exterior
form a number of times. Simply speaking, the following
phases can be distinguished:
Phase 1 – Pioneer Phase:
Following the removal of the forest canopy the forest floor is
covered by pioneer plants within a few weeks. These pioneer
species have a short life cycle of only a few months. The
species composition is dependent on site conditions (soil
type, slope, solar irradiance, distribution of rainfall etc.).
Phase 2 – Secondary Forest Phase (Up to 10 Years):
A multitude of tree species with a variety of life cycles and
ultimate heights germinates at the same time as the pioneer
species. This phase is characterized by fast growing tree
species with a life cycle of only a few years. The dynamic
of these fast growing species literally drags all the other
species in the system along. The resultant high biomass
production enhances soil dynamics and thus the cycling of
nutrients and matter.
Phases 3 (Up to 50 Years) and 4 (Up to 80 Years):
Secondary forest phase – medium and long cycle: During
these phases the forest formations characteristic of the
site develop with tree species that can reach ages of up to
80 years.
Phase 5 – Primary Forest:
All the preceding phases ultimately lead to the establishment
of those tree species that characterize the mature primary
forest, with species whose life cycle can span centuries and
up to a thousand years.
Coffee and cocoa production for example has gone into
crisis because the basic principles outlined above have not
been observed. Most of the shade trees for cocoa and coffee
belong to the group of secondary forest species with a
medium life cycle of between 20 and 50 years (e.g. Ingas
spp.). If cocoa for example is being grown in the understory
of such an ageing and not very diverse secondary forest
system, the cocoa with its much longer life cycle ages
prematurely together with its shade trees and is eliminated
by the system’s diseases and “pests” because it can no
longer fulfill its function in such a system. Only through
understanding and implementing these interconnections will
it be possible to breed for resistance and pursue alternative
approaches to the control of pests and diseases in such a
way that real solutions are provided.
Selection of Shade Trees
A challenge is the selection of shade trees that originate from
other ecosystems or which require different site conditions.
Each crop grows best under different shade conditions and
shade tree species. Trees of the family Leguminosæ such as
Leucaena, Glyricidia, Cordia aliodora are of great interest
since they fix nitrogen from the air.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
42
Agroforestry. 
Cocoa farmers in the eastern part of Cuba usually use a
shade density of around 40% in cocoa plantations.
Generally suitable shade trees are:
< Leguminous trees: Samanea saman (Algarrobo),
Gliricidia sepium (Júpiter, Piñon Florido), Erythrina
poeppigiana (Búcaro), Guazuma tomentosa
(Guasima), Leucaena spp., Spondias mombin (Jobo),
Lipi-Lipi
< Palms: Roystonea regia (Palma real)
< Fruit trees: mangoes, zapote, Citrus, avocadoes,
guapén, breadfruit (Fruta de Pan)
The Selection of Companion Crops
When selecting the companion crops and native forest tree
species to be planted in a cocoa, coffee or banana plantation,
it is important to select species from each of the guilds that
allow for a multi-tiered vertically diverse forest system.
There will only be competition between individual plants if
within the same guild more than one species occupies the
same stratum (grows to the same height). Depending on the
crops a maximum number of trees per square meter are
planted6. The more densely planted the system is, the less
the maintenance work will be required and the more
dynamically the system will develop. The continuous 
thinning of maturing individual plants as well as harvesting
open up the system and at the same time continuously add
organic matter and woody material to it.
Harvest Periods 
< Beans (60 - 70 days)
< Maize (90 -120 days)
< Pigeon pea (10 months – 24 months)
< Papaya from 8 months – 24 months
< Bananas from 13 months – several years 
(depends on varieties planted)
< Pineapple from 12 months – 36 months
< Cocoa and other fruit bearing trees 
(from 60 months – 100 years)
The example shows that with such a systems the first
harvests can be taken from the planted crops after only a
few months. Cultivation and maintenance measures should
always be combined with harvesting operations and thus be
economically supported by the latter. Combinations con-
sisting of a mix of fruiting trees such as avocado, carambo-
la, mango and jackfruit (higher understory) and a density of 
6 For details please consult the handbook Organic Coffee, Cocoa
and Tea; chapter 1.11; Editor SIPPO, Naturland, FibL.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
43
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
Table 2: 
Example of the Progression of a System 
over Time
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Years 5-10 from Year 11
Maize/Beans Pigeon pea
Pigeon pea 
(Cajanus cajan) Papaya
Papaya
Pineapple Pineapple Pineapple
Bananas Bananas Bananas Bananas
Cocoa Cocoa Cocoa Cocoa Cocoa
Forest trees/ Forest trees/ Forest trees/ Forest trees/ Forest trees/
Rubber/ Rubber/ Rubber/ Rubber/ Rubber/
Fruit trees Fruit trees Fruit trees Fruit trees Fruit trees
Palms Palms Palms Palms
Banana in combination with cocoa. (Picture: Joachim Milz).
150 trees per hectare enhance cocoa production.
Additionally, sapote (overstory) and para rubber trees
(Hevea brasiliensis) can be interspersed. For the overstory,
particularly trees which shed their leaves should be planted
(e.g. Ceiba pentandra). 
Improvement and Conversion of Established
Plantations into Agroforestry Systems
Existing coffee or cocoa plantations can be converted into
agroforestry systems in a number of ways. This question
often arises along the conversion of organic coffee or
cocoa. The approach taken depends primarily on the
existing situation of the plantation. It is not possible to
simply plant extra trees into an existing plantation with
established shade trees (Ingas ssp., Erythrinas ssp.). 
One possibility of improving the system is to create
small islands of more complex plantings within the plan-
tation. To this end cocoa trees, for example, are identified
as deficient or unproductive, or gaps are identified. The
unproductive trees are felled and adjoining cocoa trees are
heavily pruned. All the shade trees in the sphere of influence
of the “island” are pruned back to the remaining crown and
the prunings are evenly shredded and dispersed on the
ground. All the guild members are planted into this gap (if
the area is big enough pioneer plants such as maize can also
be planted). In this case it is better to use seedlings started
off in a nursery. Bananas and palms should definitely not be
left out. The plants of the different guilds as well as those of
different heights can be planted at distances of 0.5 – 1m. A
number of these “agroforestry islands” will have a positive
influence on the dynamics of the entire plantation.
As long as such plantations are of good productivity and
do not have pest or disease problems, no major interventions
should be undertaken. Such plantations can be converted to
organic cocoa plantations with the normal conversion
processes, i.e. by abandoning the use of all chemical-
synthetic aids and by correctly carrying out all maintenance
operations.
Alley Cropping
Alley cropping is an agroforestry practice adopted in many
cases in tropical organic agriculture. Fast-growing trees and
shrubs are established in hedgerows on arable cropland and
annual food crops cultivated in the alleys between the
hedgerows. The hedges are pruned prior to and periodically
during cropping cycles to prevent shading of the companion
crop, with the prunings applied to the soil as green manure
and/or mulch. Hedgerows are allowed to grow freely to
cover the land between cropping cycles. Although the
majority of hedgerow species are nitrogen fixing, legu-
minous species, several non N-fixing species have also
shown promise. By continuously retaining fast-growing,
particularly nitrogen-fixing woody perennials on croplands,
it is hoped that their productivity-restoring attributes
(e.g., nutrient cycling, weed suppression, erosion control)
would create soil conditions similar to those in the fallow
phase of shifting cultivation. Thus, in an alley cropping
system, the cropping and fallow phases can take place
concurrently on the same land, allowing the farmer to crop
the land for an extended period when socioeconomic
conditions do not allow adequately long fallow periods
for sustaining soil productivity.
Alley cropping is based on the hypothesis that trees
improve the nutrient status of soils beneath them. In alley
cropping, hedgerow woody perennials can improve soil
fertility by adding nutrients to the soil and reducing nutrient
losses from the system. The practice of periodic lopping of the
hedgerows and addition of the harvested biomass to the alleys
facilitates the transfer of nutrients from trees to crops and
can minimize the tree-crop competition for light, water and
nutrients. It is important to note, however, that most farmers
place higher values on economic and social factors than bio-
physical factors when selecting trees for their crop lands.
Commonly used hedgerow species in the humid tropics for
alley cropping:
< Cajanus cajan
< Calliandra calothyrsus
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
44
< Erythrina spp.
< Flemingia macrophylla
< Gliricidia sepium
< Inga edulis
< Leucaena leucocephala
< Paraserianthes (Albizia) falcataria
< Sesbania sesban.
G. sepium and L.leucocephala are the two species
most suitable for use in alley cropping because they can
be established easily by direct seeding, withstand repeated
prunings, produce large amounts of biomass and nutrients,
and are relatively long-lived. Flemingia macrophylla
has performed well in the humid zone on acid and low
base soils. 
1.10 Conversion to Organic
Farming
The conversion from a conventionally managed farm to
organic farming should not only improve the farm ecosystem,
but also assure the economic survival of the farm.
Therefore, the adjustments that are required on the farms
for a conversion and the related chances and risks have to
be analyzed carefully. Conversion to organic farming
requires a new way of thinking, too. The whole farm family
should get ready for the conversion in many aspects. The
first and probably the most important conversion has to
take place in the mind of the farmer.
1.10.1 The Conversion Process
Regulations concerning the conversion period vary. Below,
the conditions for the IFOAM Basic Standards and EU
Regulation for producers are listed. The EU regulation, for
example, demands a conversion period of 2 years for annual
plants and three years for perennials. In some private stan-
dards, partial farm conversion or step by step conversion
are not allowed.
National Regulations may, however, still be different; there-
fore it is necessary to consult them in advance (see Part D). 
According to IFOAM Basic Standards, the totality of
crop production and animal husbandry shall be converted
to organic management. Step by step conversion is possible
as long as the different production units are clearly distinct
and organic products cannot be mingled with conventional
ones. Products can be certified after the farm has finished
a conversion period, during which all the relevant standard
requirements must have been met from the beginning. For
certification of annual crops, the standards ought to be met
at least for twelve months prior to the start of the production
cycle, i.e. before planting or sowing the crop. For perennial
plants, at least eighteen months of fully organic management
is required before the first harvest. 
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
45
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
The start of the conversion period is usually calculated
from the date of application to the certification body, when
farmers commit themselves to following the standards.
However, a full conversion period is not required where de
facto full standards requirements have been met for several
years and where this can be verified through numerous
means and sources. Still, inspection needs to be carried out
prior to the first harvest. During the conversion period,
products can be labeled as “produce of organic agriculture
in the process of conversion” or the like, provided standard
requirements have been met for at least 12 months.
Social, Technical and Economical Adaptations
The changes in the conversion period concern social,
technical and economic aspects. Each sector poses its own
challenges to the farming family. 
Socially: Organic farming is more than an innovative
technology but involves a holistic way of thinking.
Therefore, farmers should compare their personal values
with the principles of organic farming. The more they
match, the easier it will be to follow organic farming, as the
motivation needs to come from inside rather than from
mere economic considerations. For many farmers, it is also
important how relatives, neighbors and friends perceive
organic farming, because not everybody has the strength to
oppose his/her social environment.
Production Techniques: New farming methods need
to be introduced and applied. These concern soil man-
agement, nutrient management, weed management, pest
and disease control, animal husbandry, fodder cultivation
etc. In order to be successful, the necessary know-how
has to be acquired. The farmer will need to exchange
information with experienced organic farmers, attend
trainings, test methods and observe their effect, read
publications etc.
Economically: For some adaptations on the farm level,
new materials are needed, therefore requiring some
investments. Some adaptations also involve an increase
in the work load or labor requirement. As the quantity
of the production may decrease at least in the first years
of conversion, farmers needs to find ways to overcome
the constraints. New marketing channels may be
explored in order to receive a premium price for the
products, which again requires a very different kind of
know-how.
Favorable Conditions for a Conversion Include:
< Motivation for a sustainable farm management
< Readiness to try new things
< Interest in continuous learning
< Harmony among the generations about the orientation
on the farm
< Solid knowledge on organic farming methods
< Ability to secure livelihood if the income drops 
in the conversion period
< Farm system is appropriate to the location site 
of the farm
1.10.2 Ready for Conversion?
Before taking a decision on whether to convert the farm
to organic management, farmers should have a clear
understanding of what organic management will mean to
their farm. Training courses, suitable print materials and
professional advice are possible sources of knowledge. It
is important that all persons involved in the farm, usually
the farmer's family, are involved in the decision making
process. In the next step, the situation of the farm should
be analyzed carefully, considering the requirements of
organic farming. Thus, the necessary adaptations can be
identified. Support from field advisors or experienced
organic farmers can be of great help in this analysis. In
order to become familiarized with the methods of organic
farming and to see whether they would work in the
prevailing conditions, some methods can be tested on a
small scale. 
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
46
Defining the Aims of the Farm
Do all family members have the same idea about conversion
to organic farming? What are their individual expectations?
The farming family needs to define what they wish to
achieve through a conversion. Many questions need to be
taken into consideration: 
< What are the aims of each family member concerning
income?
< Shall the products be sold at a premium price or not?
If the farmer wants to use an organic claim or label
when selling the products, certification becomes an
important issue (see chapter 6).
< Shall food for own consumption (cereals, tubers,
fruits, vegetables, milk, eggs, meat etc.) be produced?
What is the work load for each family member?
Farm Analysis
In order to improve the conversion process and to overcome
the possible obstacles, the present situation of the farm
should be analyzed carefully. Some aspects of the present
farm may be favorable for a conversion, while others can be
obstacles for which solutions must be identif ied. The
following aspects should be analyzed:
< The farming family, their capacity to try new things,
the know-how and motivation.
< Size and quality of the land holding, the climatic 
and environmental conditions.
< Soil type, fertility and structure, water availability, 
and present management.
< Present cropping system, crops suitable to the 
conditions, dependency on single crops.
< Nutrient supply with own manures from the farm 
and fertilizers brought from outside.
< Present pest, disease and weed management, 
and the pressure of infestations.
< Number and kind of farm animals, significance 
of farm yard manure, fodder cultivation.
< Mechanization (tools, machines), constructions 
(sheds, pits, terraces etc.).
< Marketing of products, subsistence.
< Availability of labor, overall work load, peak seasons.
< Economic situation of the farm, its sources of income,
depths, access to loans.
Testing Organic Farming Methods
The closer the present farming system is to organic
farming principles, the easier the conversion will be.
Before taking a decision to convert to organic farming
full-scale, farmers may make some trial runs with
organic methods in their farm. If new methods are
applied, it is always advisable to try them first on a
small scale, as this allows the farmers to check their
suitability to local conditions and it avoids large
losses in case of failure. The following methods
could be tested:
< Integrating a new crop in rotation 
or as a mixed crop.
< The effect of commercial organic manures.
< Use of a leguminous cover crop in perennial
cultivations.
< Use of natural pesticides to control pests 
and diseases.
< Increasing the outdoor and pasture access 
of the animals.
< Growing a fodder crop to replace feed 
concentrates.
< Trying herbal remedies for veterinary 
treatment.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
47
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
1.10.3 Conversion Planning
Once a decision is taken to go for organic farming, the
implementation of the necessary adaptations identified in
the farm analysis needs to be planned. The conversion plan
should prevent the transition period from being too tough:
it should prevent major problems, minimize the risks, avoid
bad investments and, last but not least, encourage the
concerned persons in their endeavors. Generally, one
should be aware that the higher the investments and the
more adaptations needed on a farm, the higher the risk and
greater the need for adequate planning.
The first step of a conversion plan is to carefully analyze
the necessary adaptations on the farm based on the current
situation, examining the farm aims and the requirements of
an organic system. As an 'ideal' system cannot be estab-
lished immediately; single steps to achieve the necessary
adaptations are defined, if possible, with a schedule. In
order to obtain; organic certification, the conversion period
officially starts only after all minimum requirements of the
standards are met. 
1.11 The Economic Performance of
Organic Farms
The motivation of farmers for organic agriculture are
manifold, such as sustainable use of nature, healthier food
production or more efficient use of farm own resources.
Yet, in order for organic production to be a feasible option
for farmers, not only their motivation is important, but also
economic aspects. Only if the farm production allows to
fulfill the subsistence and income needs of the farmers, are
able they to make a living from organic farming. 
Several factors influence the economic condition of a
farm. Changes in expenses and income need to be analyzed.
As the factors vary from farm to farm and from country to
country, it is necessary to analyze the economic potential
of the farm in order to reduce risks and avoid disappoint-
ment. In general, the more changes and adoptions are
needed on a farm, the higher is the economical risk of
conversion.
1.11.1 Costs and Returns
The economic performance of a farm can be measured by
the profit which remains for the farmer as his income. This
profit depends on production conditions and marketing
possibilities, and it is the difference between costs and
returns. Production conditions and marketing possibilities
vary from country to country, and even from farm to farm.
Fixed costs (which do not directly depend on the size of the
production) are costs for buying or renting land, buildings
or machinery and salaries of permanently employed laborers.
Wages for labor hired for specific tasks (e.g. harvesting)
depend on the production size and are therefore variable
costs, as costs for inputs are (e.g. seeds, manure, pesti-
cides). A farm will only be economically viable if the
returns exceed the total variable costs and the depreciation
of the fixed costs. The main returns are the money earned
by selling the products in the market. In a few countries,
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
48
the government provides direct subsidies to organic farmers.
But in order to understand a farm family's benefit from the
farm activities, the savings on food expenses and the
income possibly earned from outside the farm (e.g. as hired
labor or from other business activities) must be taken into
consideration, too.
Lower or Higher Costs?
Will production costs go up or down when changing to
organic farming? The factors influencing the costs during
and after a conversion are diverse and depend on the type of
farm (‘traditional’ or 'intensive'), the kind of production
(which are the main crops? is the animal husbandry included?)
and the environmental and socio-economic conditions. A
generalization is therefore questionable. In typical cases of
tropical smallholder farms, input costs initially go up
because farmers have to purchase organic manures to build
up soil organic matter, and besides machinery and labor
costs for distributing the organic manure, for weeding and
for adapting the farming system may increase. Once good
soil fertility has been achieved and the farm system has
reached a certain balance, production costs usually go
down to the pre-conversion level or even below, provided
the costs for agro-chemicals were high and the farm manages
to rely mostly on its own resources.
Lower or Higher Returns?
In temperate zones, where conventional agriculture manages
to produce very high yields, conversion to organic farming
usually results in lower yields (10 to 50 % lower), depending
on the crops and farming system. Many farmers in tropical
smallholder farms, however, reported that their yields
returned to the previous level after the conversion process
was complete, and some even achieved higher yields than
with conventional agriculture. This may be possible under
certain conditions, especially where the soil fertility
decreased due to high pesticide and herbicide use, causing
conventional farming to achieve lower yields each year.
It is dangerous, however, if false expectations are raised
among farmers. Hence the situation must be assessed
individually in each region and on each farm. To be on the
safe side, farmers interested in converting to organic
agriculture should expect a drop in yields in the initial
years and a certain recovery after some three to f ive
years. It seems that this recovery of yields can be higher
the more humid the climate is and the more the soil fer-
tility depends on its organic matter content.
Returns depend not only on the yield quantities, but also
on the price achieved in the market. If the quality of the
product decreases after conversion to organic farming
because of more damages due to pests or diseases, it may
be difficult to sell the harvest at the same rate as before.
Many farmers, however, hope to get a premium price for
their organic products once the farm is certified. Whether
this is realistic will depend on the market situation and on
whether the farmer manages to access premium price
markets (see below). To be on the safe side, farmers should
not depend too much on the expected premium price when
converting their farms. Positive economic results can also
be achieved e.g. when selling the same amount of yields at
the same rate, but produced with less costs.
1.11.2 Reducing Expenses
The income of a farmer is the difference between cost of
production and returns. Consequently, the income can not
only be improved by achieving higher yields, but also by
reducing the cost of production. Some ways to reduce
expenses are given below.
Optimizing Recycling
An effective way to reduce expenses on manure inputs is
to recycle a maximum of material on the farm. Most
important for an efficient recycling of nutrients, is the
management of the farmyard manure. Whatever nutrients
the farmer manages to recycle do not have to be purchased
from outside. Another example: Pruning from trees and
hedges can be used as firewood and their twigs and leaves
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
49
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e
as mulching material, and kitchen waste, together
with organic materials from the fields can be turned into
compost. 
Minimizing External Inputs
Organic farming is a kind of low external input agriculture.
However, some organic farms are heavily dependent on
purchased organic manures, commercial organic pesticides
and other inputs. Besides a better recycling of nutrients (see
above), there are some more ways to reduce expenses:
< Use local plants to prepare your own botanical 
pesticides.
< Produce your own crop seeds and seedlings.
< Look out for locally available sources of manures, 
e.g. by-products from agricultural processing plants.
< Grow your own food, e.g. vegetables, staple food,
fruits, cereals.
< Keep animals to produce your own manure, milk,
eggs, meat etc.
< Produce fodder from your own farm instead of buying
(organic) fodder from outside.
< Share equipment and machines with your neighbors
and get them assembled locally instead of buying or
importing.
< Use locally available materials for constructions 
(e.g. compost pits, sheds, tools etc.).
< Join with other farmers to form saving groups in order
to avoid relying on loans with high interests.
Reducing the Work Load
Even if labor compared to input costs may be cheap in
many tropical countries, farmers will in the long run invest
their own or hired labor only if there is sufficient benefit in
the results acquired. There are many ways to reduce the
amount of work on the farm. Preventive measures of organ-
ic pest and disease management, for example, help to
reduce future work. Reduced soil cultivation through the
use of mulch, partial weed tolerance or the clever arrange-
ment of shed systems in animal husbandry are other fre-
quently practiced methods. Certain activities however
should not be neglected even if they pay off only after a cer-
tain period of time, as it is the case with measures to build
up organic matter contents, in soil.
1.11.3 Ways to Increase the Returns
A positive balance between costs and returns is the base for
an economically sound way of doing organic farming. The
returns are the product of the total outputs and their price
achieved in the market. Therefore, to increase the returns,
the following approaches can be used: 
Increasing the Production
Total farm productivity can be improved by using more
suitable varieties of crops which give good yield in local
conditions. Crop yield can sometimes be increased through
better nutrient management and more efficient pest and
disease management. Additional crops can be integrated in
the cropping system through mixed cropping or crop
rotation, thus using the available space more efficiently.
Another option is to integrate animal husbandry on the
farm to achieve additional products.
Value Addition on the Farm
< In order to increase the market value of the farm 
products, farmers can:
< Choose products which are of high market value 
(e.g. medicinal plants, spices).
< Achieve a better quality for the products, e.g. by
improved handling.
< Engage in simple on-farm processing like threshing,
milling, fermenting, grading, cleaning.
< Produce processed goods, e.g. jams, dried fruits, 
pickles.
< Produce dairy products (cream, butter, cheese, yogurt,
curd etc.).
< Store products, as off-season prices are sometimes
considerably higher for certain crops.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
50
Accessing Better Markets
The income depends on the quantity of yield and on the
prices of the products paid in the market. In some countries,
farmers get exploited by middle men who pay low but sell
at a high price. If this is the case, direct marketing of
products can be an option.
Many farmers expect to get a premium price for their
organic products, as they are of better quality (less pesticide
residues, better taste etc.). In many countries, however, the
market for organic products with premium prices is still
very small. The premium price for organic farm products
varies considerably from product to product and depend on
the market channel and selling region; from 0 premium to
double price everything is possible. The average is around
+25 % on the conventional price. 
Wholesalers may offer sales guarantee in return for a
regular supply of certain items. As a single farmer may
not be able to provide a suff iciently large quantity to
the wholesaler, forming a producers’ association can
be advantageous.
Export markets are promising due to the sometimes the
high premium price sometimes paid for organic quality.
However, it is very difficult to meet the requirements of
these markets, and usually only groups of farmers linked with
professional traders are capable of surpassing the hurdles. 
Successful marketing requires specific know-how,
which cannot be dealt with in this book due to limited
space.
Diversity to Reduce the Economic Risk
The income of many farmers depends directly on the sale
of the harvest of one or two crops. If prices for these
commodities drop, these farmers inevitably face tremendous
problems. Even with stable prices, large losses can occur
when yields suddenly drop, e.g. due to pest or disease
incidence which could not be sufficiently controlled.
Diverse farms with a range of crops will suffer less from
price fluctuations or yield reductions of single crops. Crop
diversity therefore is not only helpful for establishing a
balanced ecosystem and avoiding the spread of pests and
diseases. It also helps the farmers to avoid taking a
considerable economic risks.
G e n e r a l  A s p e c t s  o f  O r g a n i c  F a r m i n g  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s  a n d  S u b t r o p i c s
51
P r o d u c t i o n  a n d  B a s i c  P r i n c i p l e s  o f  O r g a n i c  A g r i c u l t u r e

P A R T
Organic Cultivation of Fruits 
and Vegetables
B
Organic Fruits
2 
2.1 Citrus
Main production areas of organic citrus are Latin America,
North America, Europe and Near East. Smaller quantities
are produced in Africa and Asia. While fresh fruit is
produced mainly in Mediterranean climate, citrus for juice
is predominant in tropical and subtropical climates because
of higher possible sugar contents. 
The production of organic citrus is still less than 1% of
global citrus production. However, it is increasing year-by-
year, in parallel with the increasing demand for organic
products. Organic citrus for juice is mainly produced on
large-scale plantations. However, especially in organic
production, small holder and co-operative land use in the
tropics offers opportunities in fruit juice production, and in
some regions are a source for citrus juice production (e.g.
Mexico, Cuba). Many tropical countries in the Americas
are extending organic citrus production. Major importing
countries include most European countries.
2.1.1 Agro-ecological Requirements
and Site Selection
Although citrus trees can be grown over a wide range of 
climatic and edaphic conditions, proper site selection remains
the key to successful organic production. Important factors are: 
< Climate;
< Soil characteristics;
< Availability and quality of irrigation water;
< Proximity to packing or processing facilities;
< Availability of sufficient mechanization and labor 
for organic production;
< Costs associated with land and equipment purchase.
Climate
Citrus is en evergreen plant of subtropical and tropical
origin. The magnitude of the commercial production is
situated between the latitudes 40°N to 40°S where minimum
temperatures are greater than –7°C. The climate has a
significant effect on nearly all aspects of citrus growth and
quality development. This is especially important for
organic growers because their possibilities for direct meas-
ures in plant protection and plant nutrition are generally
less effective compared to conventional management.
Therefore, a successful organic grower must carefully
choose a location for citrus production and adapt his
management methods to the local climate. Some examples
of how climate determines fruit yield and quality:
< Yields from Mediterranean climate increase gradually
with the age of the orchards, peaking at 20-25 years.
Many orchards in Mediterranean climate are over 
200 years old. Yields in low tropical regions reach a
maximum age of 10-15 years. Higher pest and disease
pressure accounts for lower longevity in these regions.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
54
Citrus plantation in South Africa.
< Highest yields are achieved in the humid subtropics.
Yields in semiarid or arid subtropical regions are lower.
Yield potential in tropical regions is influenced 
by poorly drained and nutrient-deficient soils, lack 
of irrigation, fertilization and pest control. Sweet
orange yields vary from 50-100 tones per ha in humid
subtropics to 15-30 tones per ha in tropical regions.
Organic citrus growers’ experiences show minor 
differences in yield in organically and conventionally
managed citrus orchards.
< High temperatures and water deficit in early summer
cause physiological drop of fruit (when they approach
0.5-2 cm diameter), especially in semiarid or arid 
subtropical regions. 
< Yields vary considerably from year to year due to 
climatic factors.
< The percentage of marketable fresh fruit is generally
higher in semiarid or arid subtropical climates than in
tropical climates due to less disease and pest pressure
and more intense peel color. In tropical regions, where
average temperatures remain high all year, chlorophyll
levels remain high for oranges and mandarins and the
fruit peel stays green.
< In tropical regions (between 23.5° north and south),
greater heat accumulation during the night increases
respiration losses leading to decreased levels of 
soluble solids and acidity in the fruits. 
< Adequate soil moisture by rainfall or irrigation 
significantly improves fruit size.
Inducing Flowering
Water and temperature regulate the date, duration
and extent of flowering. Flower bud induction
starts during the winter at the end of the vegetative
growth stage. Where winter temperatures are not
cooling down, inducing water stress is a practical
method for flower bud induction. Generally, trees
will flower 3-4 weeks after irrigating. Application
of hormones like gibberellic acid to inhibit flowering,
or hormones to induce flowering, are not allowed
in organic production. High nitrogen nutrition
(leaf nitrogen levels around 2.8 – 3.0 % dry matter)
promote vegetative growth rather than flower set.
Low leaf nitrogen levels (around 2.2 – 2.4 % dry
matter) are often combined with extensive flow-
ering. Maintaining leaf N in the optimum range
(2.5-2.7 % of dry matter) leads to a moderate
number of flowers but greatest fruit set and
yields.
Soil Characteristics
Citrus can be grown over a wide range of edaphic condi-
tions ranging from coarse sands of low nutrient content,
sandy loams, moderate to heavy loam soils and even on
ferralitic tropical soils. Citrus trees generally grow best
at a soil pH between 5.5 and 7.0, due to the generally
adequate availability of nutrients there. Soils with a
pH lower than 5.5 can be subject to aluminum toxicity
or phosphorus deficiency; pH can be increased by lim-
ing. Remark: pH measured in water is usually 0.7 to 1.1
units higher than measured in calcium ammonium
acetate CAL.
Choosing a site with adequate drainage is important for
successful citrus production. Citrus trees growth is reduced
in poorly drained soils or where compacted soil layers are
present in the root zone. Furthermore, poor drainage causes
problems with phytophthora and other soil borne diseases.
Root and tree growth are also restricted in soils whose clay
contents exceed 50%. 
Availability and Quality of Irrigation Water
Availability of good quality irrigation water is important
for economically viable yields, especially in semiarid and
arid regions. In many arid regions, water quality is marginal
for organic citrus growing due to salinity and contamination
with heavy metals or other toxic substances. Before 
selecting a site for organic citrus production, a water analysis
is essential. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
55
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Characteristics of a Successful Site Selection for
Organic Citrus
< Climate which permits a good development of
the orchard;
< Deep and well drained soil with adequate bio-
logical activity;
< Topography which permits use of mechaniza-
tion;
< Irrigation water of low salinity, heavy metal
content and absence of human toxic microor-
ganisms e.g. coli bacteria.
2.1.2 Establishing an Organic Citrus
Orchard
Suitable Cultivars
Most citrus orchards consist of budded trees that combine
favorable attributes of the scion and rootstock. The choice
of the rootstock is a major consideration for organic citrus
growers: the choice should be based on the most important
limiting factors, in particular local climate, soil conditions,
cultivar and intended use (fresh or processed). Sour orange
(Citrus aurantium L.) is the most widely planted rootstock
in the world. It is an excellent rootstock for areas free of
Citrus tristeza virus. Rough lemon should be avoided in
areas known to have blight. Carrizo is a widespread root-
stock but burrowing nematodes are a problem. Genetically
modified Citrus rootstocks and culitvars are not allowed in
organic production.
Choosing the cultivars for organic production, factors
like disease resistance, drought resistance and quality are as
important as yield performance. Navels and Valencias are
the predominant orange cultivars. In the tropics, where
oranges are grown mainly for juice, the predominant
combination is Valencia late orange trees [Citrus sinen-
sis (L) Oesbeck] grafted on sour orange rootstock (C.
aurantium L.).
When providing trees, it is highly important to order
certified trees where the absence of diseases, pests, viruses
and authenticy of rootstock and cultivar are guaranteed. In
different organic label regulations, the use of trees from
certified organic nurseries is compulsory from 2004 on. At
present, the detailed regulations e.g. for the case where
organic trees are not available, are very dynamic.
Therefore, the actual regulations should be checked
carefully with the certification body before ordering any
plantlets.
Propagation and Nursery Management
Dissemination of diseased or unsuited cultivars or root-
stocks can have catastrophic effects on the productivity of
citrus orchards. Therefore, most countries have stringent
regulations for nursery management and the quality of the
plantlets. Citrus rootstocks are propagated by seed.
GMO-free seeds are compulsory for organic production.
Citrus seedlings are susceptible to soil-borne diseases and
pests as phytophtora, pythium or nematodes. The use of
virgin sites is very important in organic production; it
reduces the risk of soil-borne diseases and pests. Before
planting the rootstock in the nursery, well fermented
compost (according to soil analysis, e.g. 10 tones per ha)
should be applied. At sites low in phosphorus, the application
of mycorrhizal fungi supports the uptake of phosphorus.
Fertilization, irrigation and pest control practices must
comply with organic standards. 
Orchard Design
Pest and disease management tools in organic citrus
production are less effective than conventional (chemical-
synthetic) products. The organic citrus grower cannot count
on a single product to solve one specific pest or disease
attack. He depends much more on a successful combination
of indirect and direct management methods (see chapter
1.6). The first and most important measure is the design of
the organic orchard based on the ecological principle: the
higher the diversity of present species, the higher the
stability of the agro-ecosystem in the orchard.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
56
The overall objective of any orchard design in organic fruit
production is to improve bio-diversity in order to maximize
the self-regulation forces of nature. This is done by: 
< Creating a diverse mosaic of citrus units, mixed with
ecological compensation areas such as specific cover
crops in the alleyway and under the trees as well 
as hedges and wild flower fallow plots around and 
in the orchard (see chapter 1.8);
< A plant density that permits optimal light interception
and aeration. This shortens the duration of leaf wetness
and thus disease development;
< Use of environmental friendly equipment and 
construction materials for the orchard.
The establishment of ecological compensation areas
around the orchard and between the plots with a stable and
high degree of biodiversity to form ecological connection
corridors is essential in creating a habitat for natural
enemies of pests. Furthermore, an ecologically diversified
orchard with a high degree of bio diversity is aesthetically
very attractive. A value point that is also highly regarded by
the (organic) customers. 
Generally, citrus grows successfully in a wide range of
plating systems. Tree spacing ranges from 8 x 8 m
(156 trees per ha) in Cuba or Florida to as close as 1.5 x
3 m (2222 trees per ha) in central China. Usually, lower
density plantings (156-300 citrus trees per ha) are better
adapted to the organic production system than high density
plantings (> 300 citrus trees per ha), mainly for three
reasons:
< Organic cultural practices are considerably more 
troublesome in high-density plantations: 
often it is not possible to saw in a cover crop 
(see chapter 1.2.3). 
< Mechanization in narrow alleyways is more 
complicated and expensive (spray application, soil
management, compost application, harvest).
< High-density plantings reduce ventilation and light
interception and thus increase disease pressure. 
Transplanting and Plant Density
In tropical areas with high rainfall, the juvenility period is
considerably shorter than in arid subtropical regions with
suboptimal irrigation. Growth retardants to accelerate flow-
ering (e.g. paclobutrazol) are not allowed in organic farming.
Some months before planting citrus trees, organic growers
can saw in vigorous legumes (e.g. Canavalia sp. or Cayanur
cayan) and later mulch them shortly before planting the
citrus trees. Through this measure, the soil will be enriched
with organic matter and nitrogen, both of which stimulate
soil microbial activity. The next step is to lay out the irrigation
system and dig out the planting holes. The trees should be
planted at the same depth as they were grown in the nursery.
Often, citrus trees are planted too deep. This exposes the sus-
ceptible scion to root rot diseases. Also the scion can start to
root itself, neutralizing the beneficial effect of the rootstock.
2.1.3 Soil Management
The building-up and maintenance of a high soil fertility is
a central goal of organic agriculture. In the grower’s prac-
tice there are three main agronomic questions related to soil
management and the conversion to organic management of
citrus orchards: 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
57
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Citrus soil cover with leguminose plants.
< How to improve soil fertility?
< How to cover the soil and how to control undesired
plants?
< How to provide sufficient nutrients to the soil 
and citrus trees?
Careful soil management is especially important in the
tropics, where heavy rainfall and strong solar radiation
accelerate soil degradation, leaching of nutrients and erosion.
Relevant soil management techniques for organic citrus
orchards include: 
< Use of cover crops (understorey) plants, mulching,
agroforestry and intercropping methods;
< Composting, and the use of natural mineral 
fertilizers (e.g. rock powder, rock phosphate, 
potassium sulphate);
< Mechanical techniques for weed control.
These basic tools of organic soil management are inter-
dependent and influence tree health, tree development,
yield and fruit quality. 
Soil Cover Systems
While in conventional citrus production in the tropics even
flat soils can suffer from erosion due to the abundant use of
herbicides and the lack of soil cover, in organic orchards a
long term – if possible permanent soil cover – is an impor-
tant component of the system. Locally adapted leguminous
crops, such as Teranamus labialis, Arachis pintoi,
Neonotonia wightii, can help restore degraded soils very
quickly; they successfully suppress weed, fix nitrogen and
prevent erosion (experiences of a project in Cuba). 
Cover Crops Have a Number of Important
Agroecological Advantages in Citrus Orchards. Cover
Crops:
< Balance the soil climate (temperature, humidity);
< Improve soil structure;
< Increase water and nutrient retention capacity;
< Protect from erosion;
< Deliver primary energy (root exudates) energy and
organic matter for soil microbial life;
< Suppress undesired vegetation;
< Cover crop plants serve as habitats for natural 
predators. Leguminous cover plants fix air-bourne
nitrogen that becomes available in parts for 
citrus crops.
Cover crops may compete with citrus for water, but
rarely for nutrients. This competition can be minimized by
suitable management of the cover crop: mulching the cover
crops before the dry season and by utilizing optimal adapta-
tion of the soil cover system to the soil, crop and climate
conditions. One possible solution is the sandwich-system,
which is in testing phase. The sandwich-system and the tra-
ditional cover system are two soil cover variants that are
applied in organic citrus growing. Intercropping and agro-
forestry are more suitable for small farmer co-operatives
and subsistence farming. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
58
CO
M
PO
ST
Figure 1: 
Sandwich-System
C
O
VE
R 
C
RO
P 
(L
IV
IN
G
 M
UL
C
H
)
C
O
VE
R 
C
RO
P 
(L
IV
IN
G
 M
UL
C
H
)
C
O
VE
R 
C
RO
P 
(L
IV
IN
G
 M
UL
C
H
)
TI
LL
ED
 S
TR
IP
TI
LL
ED
 S
TR
IP
CO
M
PO
ST
The Sandwich-System was developed by the Swiss
Reasearch Insitute for organic agriculture (FibL). It
consists of a narrow strip (30-60 cm wide) of cover
plants in the middle of the tree strip. At the left and
right side of the middle strip, the soil is cultivated
for weed control with relatively simple tools. Thus,
in the case of trees, the soil volume without weed
competition is the same as in the traditional cultiva-
tion over the whole width of the tree strip. However,
the mechanization necessary is much simpler and
cheaper.
The Sandwich-system allows a fully organic nutri-
tion concept with application of compost on the
tilled strips. Composts, mulches and fertilizers are
applied mechanically on the tilled strips and tilled-
in to 5 cm depth. 
The alleyway is covered by a (preferentially) legu-
minous cover crop. In dry areas it is often not possible
to have a permanent crop cover. In these areas it is
therefore recommendable to have a green cover crop
during the rain season that should be supplemented
with dead mulch during the dry season. 
The Sandwich-system achieves several goals of
organic farming: Soil cover with valuable crops,
avoidance of erosion, target-oriented organic fer-
tilization, avoidance of competition in the main
rooting zone.  
The Sandwich-system is highly feasible for young
plantations, and in orchards with deep soils where tree
roots are not too close to the soil surface. However, in
orchards formerly established with herbicides and soil
erosion, “dug out” citrus roots are sometimes present. In
the above mentioned case, it would be too harmful for the
trees to change to a cultivation system. In these cases sys-
tems, cover crops or organic mulches should be used. In
such orchards, the traditional cover crop system is the suit-
able method.
The traditional cover crop system still is known by
older citrus growers and was widely applied in
citrus-plantations before the green revolution.
Compost and other fertilizers are applied in the tree
strips. 
< The alleyway is covered by a leguminous 
cover-crop.
< The traditional cover crop system needs 
specific, relatively expensive equipment 
for the mulching under the trees.
Intercropping 
For smallholders, it is useful not to rely on citrus pro-
duction alone. However, other tropical fruit trees species
presently lack a production level that permits real market
potential. Thus, space to grow additional crops is limited to
the alleyway. Successful examples are beans and corn for
self-sufficiency supply (e.g. in Cuba) or Aloe vera (e.g. in
Mexico). The Aloe vera extract finds multiple uses in the
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
59
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
CO
M
PO
ST
Figure 2: 
Traditional Cover Crop
DE
A
D 
M
UL
C
H
DE
A
D 
M
UL
C
H
C
O
VE
R 
C
RO
P 
(L
IV
IN
G
 M
UL
C
H
)
CO
M
PO
ST
cosmetic, pharmaceutical and fruit juice industry. The
advantage of Aloe vera is that it is quite shade tolerant and
has been planted among citrus and other fruit trees with
great success. Producers who select an intercropping
system have to be aware that cultural practices can be
considerably affected compared to a orchard with citrus
only. Much more hand work is necessary in intercropping
systems. 
Agroforestry 
As examples in Eastern Cuba or the Mexican
peninsula of Yucatan show it is possible to produce
organic citrus successfully also in agroforestry
systems. In agroforestry systems, citrus trees are
mixed with other fruit trees, leguminous trees,
banana, palm trees, coffee and cocoa, beans and
other species covering the soil. The high degree of
diversity decreases the risks of disease infestation
and enhances ecological pest control through the
appearance of a highly diverse bird and insect
communities that are abundant in the different
layers of the trees and bushes. Of course, citrus
yields per ha in such a system are considerably
lower than in classical orchards. But as a compensa-
tion, the grower can count on a large number of
crops throughout the year for his self-sufficiency.
With an agroforestry system; market success is only
obtainable if at least one high quality product (cash
crop) can be grown. The high socio-economic and
ecological value of agroforestry systems is obvious,
but market access for its products is often difficult.
Furthermore, the effects of agroforestry systems on
citrus fruit and juice quality have yet to be studied
further.
2.1.4 Tree Nutrition and Fertilization
Fertilization practices in conventional citrus production
aim to guarantee yields and fruit quality. Tree nutrition in
organic citrus growing has additional objectives:
< To strengthen plant vitality
< To minimize pest and disease problems
< To avoid nutrient losses by leaching or volatilization
< To improve soil microbial life
Therefore, organic fertilization is based primarily on
organic material, such as farmyard manure, compost from
plant residues, green manure. Only if necessary – on basis
of soil or leaf analysis – additional commercial organic
fertilizers are brought into the system. Consequently, there
is an important mass of aerobically decomposed organic
matter cycling in the system. Materialization and decom-
position processes are influenced by humidity, temperature
and availability of oxygen. Under the humid tropical
conditions these processes run faster and continuously all
year long, whereas under colder climate conditions these
processes are slower and come to a standstill during the
colder months. Soil type also plays a role. Sandy soils dry
out fast, slowing down the decomposition processes;
ferralitic soils, on the other hand, are generally not very
fertile but usually show fast decomposition and building-
up of stable organic matter. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
60
Citrus fertilization with compost.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
61
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 3: 
Importance, Needs and Application of Nutrients in Organic Citrus Production
Nutrients Important to Know Fertilization
Nitrogen (N) • Important for vegetative growth, yields Organic regulations limit annual N-applications. BIO-SUISSE for example currently allows maximum 
and fruit quality; 160 kg N per ha and year for citrus orchards. This corresponds to the N export of 33 t/ha oranges
• N-deficient leaves become yellow and pale. (1,6 kg N/t fruit plus tree growth plus losses). The N-fertilization of each farm is evaluated individually. 
Fruit quality decreases: higher acidity, lower
in sugar and vitamin C; Example of N fertilization in organic citrus production on basis of farm-own – sources:
• Highly soluble and mobile in soil and 1. Compost (below): With 10 t/ha around 150 kg Ntotal/ha and 75 kg Neffective/ha are applied 
(40-70% of mineral can be lost because (1-2 applications, mainly in mid-winter); 
of leaching and volatilisation); 2. N-fixation through leguminous cover crops yields between 40 and 60 kg N/ha;
• Antagonist of Cu; 3. In addition, azotobacter bacteria  fix additional air bourne N;
4. If necessary and based on soil and leaf analysis other, commercial N-sources can be applied, such as: 
algae products, vinasse (malt extract) fish meal or oil, horn meal and guano. 
Phosphorus (P) • Essential element for cell structure and Compost applications mostly bring enough P. In combination with micorhizza-application, enough P is 
energy systems. Enhances productivity accessible for the trees. 
and fruit quality;
• P-deficiencies: very rarely demonstrate In case of P deficiencies, materials with high P-content should be used in compost production (e.g. citrus-pulp
symptoms; reduction in bloom intensity and peel, chicken or pig-manure). However, in many cases compost is high in P and problems of
and fruit size; Zn-antagonism are of greater concern that P-deficiencies.
• Citrus trees require relatively low quantities;
• Immobile in the soil and tends to accumulate; If compost application does not solve deficiency problems, the application of rock phosphate is a solution. 
• Annual application mostly not needed; However, in citrus production, are  mostly not needed.
• Antagonist of Zn;
Potassium (K) • Regulates ionic balances in the cell, fruit size, Compost applications mostly provide enough K. 
quality and peel thickness;
• K-deficiency: small fruits with thin peel, In case of deficiencies, materials with high K-content should be used in compost production  
splitting of fruit; (e.g. wood-ashes).
• Naturally high in some soils; no annual 
application needed; Other potassium sources allowed in organic farming, such as pot-ash, potassium sulphate or stone powder 
• Mobile, losses by leaching can occur; are needed very rarely in citrus production. In case of deficiency symptoms, soil and leaf analysis are 
• Antagonist of Ca and Mg; recommended.
Calcium (Ca) • Important for enzyme functioning and quality; Soils with pH (CAL) lower than 5.5 should be limed to pH 6.5. If the soil is very alcaline (pH higher 
• Ca-deficiency: rare, not distinguishable than 7.5) contact your adviser to discuss whether and which measures should be taken. 
symptoms;
• Calcium is an important element to stabilize 
soil aggregates and thus soil physical and 
soil biological properties;
• Excessive Ca contents in soils (pH in CAL > 7) 
reduce the availability of Iron, zinc and boron;
Magnesium (Mg) • Essential for enzyme functioning; Magnesium and Micronutrients generally are abundant in soils of pH 5.5-7. Deficiency symptoms also  
and Micro-nutrients • Mg-deficiencies: causes chlorosis and should appear, when soil conditions are not favorable and therefore may be corrected by: 
be corrected; • Optimizing pH;
• Zn- (smaller leaves) and Fe-deficiencies • Improving soil structure and aeration; 
(chlorosis) are very widespread, especially • Avoid antagonisms (avoid exaggerated N, P and K-applications). 
in soils of high pH;
• Mn-deficiencies only require corrections in Furthermore, abundant quantities of micronutrients are applied through compost. In most cases it is  
severe cases; not necessary to apply additional micronutrients
• Cu: sufficient applied with fungicides;
• Mo-deficiencies are very rare (low pH); If after soil amendments and compost applications deficiency-symptoms still appear, magnesium and foliar 
micronutrients may be applied (e.g. Algae, ground shells, ZnSO4, MnSO4, Borax). Organic certifiers only 
accept their application under the following conditions:
• Existance of visual symptoms; 
• Deficiency is proven in soil or/and leaf analysis;
• Before application, such proof needs to be presented to the certifier together with a request for application;
• Effects of application have to monitored and evaluated (inclusive not treated parcel).
To plan the tree nutrition concept of the orchard, it is
essential to conduct, in advance, an assessment of the chem-
ical, physical and biological condition of the soil. The
results found will show the weak points of the soil and its
need for improvement. Only then can a strategy be planned
with which on-farm fertilizers or commercial fertilizers can
best achieve optimum tree nutrition and soil conditioning.
Most organic fertilizers, especially compost, mineralize
nitrogen at a slower rate than mineral nitrogen fertilizers.
Applications therefore have to be applied 2-4 weeks before
the expected nitrogen demand of the trees (2-4 weeks
before flowering). If nitrogen demand is important (> 50 kg
/ha) nitrogen supply cannot be achieved with compost only
because it would lead to an excessive phosphorus and
potassium supply.
In most soils, primarily nitrogen and potassium fertil-
ization is needed to obtain acceptable yields. Leaf and soil
analysis are important tools in monitoring soil and plant
nutritional status and in planning fertilization. It involves
basic measures to improve crop yields and quality and to
maintain soil fertility and minimize environmental pollution.
In different regulations of organic labels, a yearly and equil-
ibrated nutrient balance of phosphorus, potassium and
nitrogen is required for farm certification. 
Table3 describes the basic requirements of the macro,
meso and micro nutrients of citrus and explains how to
apply these nutrients in an organic management.
How to Produce an Optimal Compost with the
Existing Raw Materials?
Compost is the main element of organic fertilizing.
Through application of organic matter and microor-
ganisms, compost improves not only soil microbial
live, but also physical and chemical soil properties
such as water and nutrient retention capacity.
Moreover, well fermented compost contains antibi-
otics and contributes in this way to the control
of diseases. Organic citrus growers therefore are
highly concerned with producing an optimal com-
post on the basis of locally available raw materials
such as citrus filter press cake, animal manure, cov-
er crop residues. Poultry manure has a high content
of mineral nitrogen. Some organic citrus producers
use dried poultry manure only; however, the risk of
excessive N supply combined with leaching losses
etc. is very high. Mixing the poultry manure with
plant waste materials and producing good compost
will practically avoid these risks. The initial mixture
of the raw material should have a carbon to nitrogen
ration (C:N) relation of 30:1, a proper structure and
allow enough aeration. The fermentation process
should be frequently observed and attended perma-
nently (roturation of compost). The application
(around 10 t/ha and year) should be as close as
possible to the active root system of citrus trees.
2.1.5 Weed Control = Soil Cover 
+ Management of Undesired
Plants
Conventional citrus growers have mostly a very superficial
opinion on weeds: they compete with the citrus trees for
nutrients and water. Therefore, they have to be removed
with herbicides and mechanical methods. Organic grow-
ers prefer to distinguish between desirable and undesirable
cover plants instead of weeds, and speak of cover crop man-
agement instead of weed control: Weed management is part
of the multipurpose soil cover management (see above).
The goal of organic citrus growers is to create a system and
enhance conditions in which competitive cover crops
(planted legumes and other desired spontaneous plants)
dominate undesired plants like perennial grasses as Panicum
sp., Paspalum sp., Amaranthus. There is a large number of
desired plants that under conventional management are
killed by herbicides, but in reality provide worthwhile
habitats for beneficial insects or/and improve soil conditions
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
62
without competing citrus trees (e.g. Centrosema pubescens,
Desmodium, Cassina obtusifolia and Alysicarpus
vaginalis). Such soil cover plants are not removed, but
enhanced in organic citrus production. However, soil cover
plants also can be habitat for pests and have to be selected
carefully. 
The organic management of cover plants consists in
regular mowing of the leguminous cover crops and – if
necessary – hand weeding of undesired plants that start to
dominate with cover crops or citrus trees (especially
ranking herbs and tall grasses). Different types of mowers
are available, most of them operated by a power take-off
from the tractor. Specially constructed mowers are avail-
able for organic orchards that permit mowing in the
alleyway and under the trees with sensor controlled “bat
wings”. Mulching and traditional discing are also feasible
techniques for organic production. Biological weed control
e.g. with Phytophthora palmivera to control Morrenia
odorata and Allopathy e.g. with extracts of Lantana to
control rye grass may have a potential for future but have
not yet been developed for practical use. Cover crop man-
agement and weeding of undesired plants requires addi-
tional man power and has to be considered carefully in
the conversion planning. 
2.1.6 Water Management and
Irrigation
The leaves of citrus trees are covered with epicuticular wax.
Citrus trees are therefore water-conserving plants capable
of withstanding long periods of drought. However, severe
water stress inhibits vegetative growth and fruit development
(size and quality). The key to successful water management
is to reduce the duration of stress. Even in humid subtropi-
cal and tropical regions with sufficient total rainfall, irriga-
tion is important during the dry periods to achieve good
yields. Irrigation also reduces physiological fruit drop,
improves flowering, fruit set, fruit size and juice content.
On the other hand, excessive irrigation can affect fruit qual-
ity negatively: contents of soluble solids and acidity
decrease due to a dilution effect.
Most citrus growers irrigate based on a calendar; only a few
utilize soil-based considerations. Important concerns of
organic growers are: 
< To minimize the use of limited water resources;
< To use good quality irrigation water;
< To minimize negative effects of irrigation to the soil
(salinization, contamination) and to fruit quality.
Water saving micro-irrigation is preferred in organic
farming to flood or overhead sprinkler irrigation. Some
citrus farms have had good experiences with furrow irri-
gation. Drip irrigation is even more water efficient than
micro-irrigation. However, drip irrigation moistens only
a small soil volume resulting in fairly restricted root
extension that requires liquid fertilization with synthetic
fertilizers (fertigation) that are not permitted in organic
growing. Micro-irrigation systems are subject to clog-
ging by particles, calcium stain, insects, bacteria and
algae. Therefore they require high water quality (filtration)
and intensive maintenance. Adding Chloride to the
irrigation water to control bacteria and algae is not
permitted in organic production. An alternative is
phosphoric acid. 
A well controlled irrigation system is important in order
to avoid the proliferation of soil-born fungi such as phy-
tophtora and phytium. Mikrosprinklers should not wet the
trunk. Excessive flood irrigation, besides affecting soil
conditions (anaerobic), may promote soil-born fungi. For
all irrigation systems high quality water is crucial. Organic
growers are responsible for avoiding microbial or chemical
contamination of the crop by irrigation water. Regular
water analysis is compulsory for organic certification. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
63
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
2.1.7 Freeze Protection
Freeze-damage is a concern in some subtropical
regions, but never in tropical regions (since citrus tissues
are damaged only when ice forms, it seems appropriate to
use the term “freeze” rather than “frost”). The most effec-
tive method of freeze protection is careful site selection:
choice of areas where temperatures remain above –2°C
effectively avoid fruit and tree losses. Other passive protec-
tion measures include wind breaks and clean cultivation.
Clean cultivation means a surface free of cover plants (a
bare soil can store more heat during the day and release
more of this heat during the night than a surface with veg-
etation). But for the reasons explained above, bare soil is
not desirable in organic production. An alternative may be
the use of tree covers to avoid radiation losses (planting of
high standing trees). However, citrus growers do not con-
sider this method as economically viable for commercial
production (even if such systems have been used since
Roman times and still exist in southern Europe). 
Active frost protection methods like orchard heating
and wind machines are expensive and consume consider-
able amounts of energy. Frost irrigation with overhead
sprinklers may be more suitable for organic farming. The
water releases some energy when it turns to ice; this
crystallisation energy keeps the temperature of the tree
organs above zero degrees and prevents freeze damage. The
water may not be turned off before air temperature is above
zero again; often large quantities of water are required. 
2.1.8 Pruning
As trees grow, inner and lower branches become shaded. In
large citrus trees most of the fruiting occurs in the outer
periphery of the canopy whereas the inner parts suffer from
shading having bad or no fruit set and quality. The shading
problem can become even more severe in high-density
plantings. Therefore, a yearly pruning is essential to maintain
light penetration through the canopy. Organic citrus growers
must pay special attention to optimal light and air pene-
tration because good aeration also contributes to the pre-
vention of pests and diseases.
As a general rule, it is advisable to maintain tree height
at no more than twice the planting distance in the row. The
most commonly used methods of tree size control include
hand pruning and mechanical hedging and topping. The
three major types of pruning cuts are heading-back,
thinning out and selective pruning to remove damaged or
dead limbs, for example after phytophtora infections,
freeze or storm damages. 
Pruning with the objective to regenerate citrus trees
is carried out in winter or during the vegetative rest of
the trees. Hedging and topping to control tree growing
takes place during the vegetation phase, and fruit regu-
lation is handled after flowering in case of alternate
fruit bearing.
Products to paint and protect cutting wounds based on
copper are permitted in organic fruit growing. Growth
regulators as 2,4-D and synthetic hormones are also not
permitted in organic fruit production. 
2.1.9 Pest and Disease Management 
Organic pest and disease management places priority on
indirect control methods. Direct control methods are
applied as a second priority.
Indirect Control Methods:
< Promotion of beneficial insects and plants by habitat
management: organic orchard design, ecological 
compensation areas with hedges, nesting sites etc.;
< Soil management: Organic compost and plant slurry 
to improve soil structure and soil microbial activity;
< Pruning: good aeration of the orchard.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
64
Direct Control Methods:
< Biological control: release of antagonists, natural 
predators and entomophagous fungi;
< Mechanical control methods;
< Organic pest and disease control products 
(see positive-lists of organic regulations).
Examples of pests and organic control methods
Most mites, insects and nematodes that attack citrus cause
economic damage only occasional. Many pest problems in
conventional citrus production are related to the almost
complete elimination of natural enemies through the
excessive use of synthetic pesticides. Organic growers
make use of natural control agents to the maximum. Many
pest problems can be controlled effectively with biological
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
65
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 4: 
Citrus Pests and Organic Control Management
Pests Important to Know Biological Control Methods
ERIOPHYIDAE: • Damage results from feeding by piercing • Application of Hirsutella thompsonii, an entomophagous fungi (in many cases this fungus is naturally present);
Phyllocoptruta oleivora and sucking; • Introduction of predatory mites;
(Citrus rust mite) • Causes formed twigs, leaves and fruit; 
• Mite must be observed with lens;
THRIPIDAE: (a) Cause fruit blemishes; • Introduction of predatory mites (Euseius hibisci and Anystis agilis) and the minute pirate bug;
Heliothrips (b) Orchards with ground cover have fewer thrip • In case of high infestation pressure rotenone and pyrethrum may be applied; 
haemorrhoidalis problems (natural enemies in the ground litter); 
(Greenhouse thrips)
ALEYRODIDAE: • Attack young flushes; • Introduction of parasite wasps (but this control is easily disturbed by ants defending the honeydew);
Dialeurodes citrifoli • Serious problem for young trees; 
(Citrus white fly) • Produces honey dew that attracts ants, 
causes sooty mould and “dirty” sticky fruit;
APHIDIDAE: • Population increases very fast on spring • A number of predators, parasites and fungi can help to control brown citrus aphid;  
Toxoptera citrisidus leaves and flushes; • Bio-control methods and agents usually help to decrease the level of a pest rather than to eradicate it; 
(Brown citrus aphid) • Usually not an economic pest, but important 
vector of Citrus tristeza virus (CTV);
COCCIDAE: • The young scale settles on all parts of the • Parasitized by Metaphycus spp.; 
Coccus hesperidum canopy, adults on twigs; • Application of ladybird beetle larvae and parasitic flies (pest species are specific and differ from  
(Brown soft scale) • Produce honeydew which attracts ants and location to location); 
causes sooty mould;
• Natural predators – such as ladybird beetle 
larvae and parasite flies contribute to soft 
scale control; 
DIASPIDIDAE: • Primarily a limb and trunk feeder; • Application of ladybird beetle and parasites;
Unaspis cirti • Soil cover provides a habitat for natural 
(Snow scale) predators;
CURCULINOIDAE: • Larvae fall to the ground and infest • Application of entomophagous fungi such as Beauveria bassiana, Metarrhizium anisopliae;
Pachneus citri the root system; they attack the larval stage in the ground;
(Citrus root weevil) • Application of predators and parasites;
FORMICIDAE: • Cause severe leaf loss; • Application of Beauveria bassiana to the soil; they parasitize the fungi in the nests of the ants;
Atta spp. 
(Leaf-cutting ant)
LEPIDOPTERA (ORDER): • Generally not an economic pest; • Release of several predators and parasites;
Phyllocnistis citrella • Occasional leaf or fruit damage;
(Citrus leaf miner)
TRYPETIDAE: • Adults oviposit in the immature fruit and • Mass trapping (combination of food baits with organic insecticides, such as Spionosad); 
Ceratitis capitata the larvae feed and develop in the fruit pulp; • Release of the braconid parasite Diachasmimorpha tryoni and nematodes; 
(Mediterranean fruit fly) • Sterile insect technology (STI) is not permitted in organic agriculture.
control methods. Generally, bio-control methods and
agents usually help to decrease the level of pests rather than
to eradicate them. The following table is not complete and
shows just one important species for some pest families.
In some cases, preventive and bio-control measures are
not sufficient and the damage by a pest or a disease may
reach a level of considerable economic loss. This is when
direct control measures with natural pesticides, such as
pyrethrum, derris, neem, soaps, mineral and plant oil as
well as mass trapping and confusion techniques may
become appropriate.
Examples of Diseases and Organic Control Methods
There are a large number of citrus diseases caused by
bacteria, mycoplasma, fungi and viruses. Table 5 contains
some important examples. The organic citrus disease
management consists in a three-step system:
< Use of disease-free planting material to avoid future
problems;
< Choosing rootstocks and cultivars that are tolerant or
resistant to local diseases;
< Application of organic fungicides such as and copper,
sulfur, clay powder and fennel oil. Cu can control 
several disease problems. However, it must not be 
forgotten that high Cu accumulations are toxic for soil
microbial life and reduce the cation exchange capacity. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
66
Table 5: 
Citrus Pests and Organic Control Management
Disease Important to Know Indirect Control Direct Control
Xanthomonas • bacterial infection of fruit and leaves, • Planting windbreaking trees or headges; • Cu applications during spring flush; 
campestris dissemination by wind, rain and injuries;
(Citrus canker) • Affects fruit quality and causes fruit losses;
Capnodium citri • Fungus that grows on leaf surface; • Control of honeydew producing insects • Cu applications, 
(Sooty mould) • Honeydew from insects promotes (Dialeurodes citrifoli, Coccus hesperidum etc.);
Sooty mould;
Mycosphaerella citri • Causes serious yield loss in humid climates; • Removal of leaf litter if natural decomposition • Applications of Cu and other fungicides oil; 
(Greasy spot) • Yellow moddle on the upper and lesions is not sufficient (this practice may not be 
at the lower surface; economically feasible);
• Blotchy areas on grapefruit;
Phytophthora parasitica • Causes root rot and gummosis; • Resistant and tolerant rootstocks (Trifoliata, • Good pruning practice;  
and Phytophthora • Root and trunk infections decrease tree vigour Swingle, Cleopatra, Sour orange, rough • Cu applications on wounds (Bouille bordelaise   
citrophthora and productivity; lemon etc.); 2% and cover with wax);
(Gummosis) • Good soil drainage;
• Careful irrigation (avoid flood irrigation 
and irrigation directly on the trunk);
Citrus tristeza virus • Virus is transmitted by budding and by • Avoid sour orange rootstock; • Remove infected trees; 
CTV aphid vectors; • CTV-free budwood programs;
• Trees are stunted and remain small, • Control vectors like Toxoptera citrisidus; 
leaf chlorosis, reduced fruit size;
Citrus blight • Probably caused by a pathogen; • Choice of tolerant rootstock (very small • Pruning or removal of infested trees; 
• Transmitted by root grafts or peaces choice available); 
from infected trees;
• Trees are weakened and become infected 
by Phytophthora;
2.1.10 Harvesting and Post Harvest
Handling
Harvest
All citrus must ripen on the tree; different from some other
fruit species, citrus does not ripen any further once
removed from the tree. Before harvest, samples of oranges
from a particular block should be tested for Brix (= content
of soluble sugars = total soluble solids TSS) and acidity
content. The ratio of Brix to acidity content is a measure of
the maturity. With oranges the ratio varies during the season,
but generally a minimum of 8.50 Brix and a ratio to acidity
content of 10.00 to 1 is required. Many juice processing
plants ask for even higher maturity standards. Once a tested
block is ready for harvest, a crew of pickers is sent to harvest
the entire block. Currently, almost all orange orchards are
harvested by hand. There are a few experimental mechanical
harvesters in use (e.g. trunk shaker) but so far, these are not
more economic than hand harvestors. Fruit is loaded in pack-
ing containers and transported to the packing house (for
fresh fruit) or processing plant (for juice).
Packing House Procedures
Most packing houses follow the same procedure. However,
certain treatments applied to conventional fruit are allowed
for organic fruit:
< Degreening: Conventional citrus are treated with 
ethylene in order to remove chlorophyll so carotenoid
pigments of the skin become brightly visible. This
treatment is not allowed for organic citrus. Most 
customers of organic citrus accept a reduced 
homogeneity of fruit color. If they don’t, fruit has 
to be graded for color.
< Dumping: Conventional citrus may be dumped into
water that usually contains chlorine and a fungicide 
to prevent post harvest diseases. This treatment is not
applied with organic fruit (both products are not
allowed for organic fruit handling).
< Pre-size: Fruit is pre-sorted manually to remove trash
and fruit with obvious defects. 
< Wash: Fruit are washed with a mild detergent and
water spray rinsed in order to remove dirt, insects and
loosely adhering mould. 
< Waxing: Wax is applied to the fruit after drying. Only
natural carnauba waxes are allowed for organic citrus.
Any synthetic waxes or waxes with fungicides are not
allowed for organic products. 
< Selection: Fruits are selected by hand for packing. 
< Packing: Fruit is packed into several types 
of containers. Some organic label regulations require
or forbid specific packing material.
< Storage: Citrus can be cold stored for 2 months 
at 0-4°C with very little loss of fruit quality.
Controlled atmosphere (CA) storage is an alternative
to cold storage, but in many cases it is not interesting
because of high costs. 
Juice Processing
Generally, juice processing is – compared to fresh fruit
handling – quite simple under organic rules because juice
processing does not require any additives. However, it is
important to consult all processing regulations of the
specific label before starting a project (see step j.):
(a) At the processing plant, the trailer load of oranges will
be unloaded onto a conveyor belt. A  random fruit
sample from this belt is tested for juice content and
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
67
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Selection of vegetables for packaging.
maturity. The most desirable quality for orange juice
contains > 12 % Brix, a 14-16 sugar: acidity ratio, and
a juice color score of at least 36. 
(b) The fruit is then transferred to storage bins and labeled
according to the juice specification. Later, quality
oranges are selected to achieve optimal juice quality
and blended from the most suitable bins. 
(c) The fruit is conveyed on a transport belt through a
washing process.
(d) Then it enters into the processing plant where it is
graded for bad or damaged fruit. The fruit is then 
sorted by size and sent to the juice extractors. 
(e) Inside the extractors, before juicing, the peel is pricked
to gain, in a separate process, the aetheric oils found in
the peel, then the juice is extracted. 
(f) As a next step, the pulpy juice is pumped through 
a finisher (screen) where the pulp and seeds are 
separated, which, together with the peel, are used for
by-products, such as cattle feed or compost (important
for organic citrus production). 
(g) From this point on, the juice may either go directly
into a pasteurizer in the case of Not From Concentrate
(NFC), or it goes on to the evaporators where most of
the water is taken out of the juice by heating it under a
vacuum; then the juice is chilled to produce frozen con-
centrated orange juice (FCOJ). This process also strips
out certain essences and oils. 
(h) The concentrated juice contains between 60 to 70°
Brix is pumped to the tank farm where the concentrate
is stored at about -28° C, separated by variety and by
the Brix (acidity ratio). 
(i) When ready to ship, the frozen orange is blended from
the various tanks to meet the customer’s demand.
(j) The juice is transported deep frozen in 200 liter barrels
or in bulk tank ships to the destination port, and from
there to the packager where juice is bottled and
labeled. A few organic label organizations do not
allow the reconstitution of concentrate with water to
single strength juice. In this case, single NFC-juice has
to be produced right from the start.
2.2. Guava
Guava (Psidium guajava L., Myrtaceae) is a small tree
with a spreading, broad top that develops from a short
trunk. It is native to the American tropics but has become
naturalized in practically all tropical and subtropical
climates of the world. Guava is an important fruit for some
countries and is an popular dessert in Latin America.
Further, guava is cultivated as fence, ornamental plant and
for timber products. 
As a general rule, guava requires little attention.
Therefore, guava is easily feasible under organic manage-
ment. Organic guava as a main crop or as part of mixed
fruit gardens is produced in many tropical and subtropical
countries. However, organic guava in much less demand by
the international market compared to banana, citrus or
mango. Therefore, production and trade of organic guava
and guava products never will reach the volumes of other
tropical fruit. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
68
Guava. 
2.2.1 Agro-ecological Requirements
and Site Selection
Climate
Because it is of tropical origin, guava grows best in tropical
and subtropical areas that are frost-free. Mature trees
survive light frosts. A warm, humid condition is most
optimum for guavas. However, it thrives well in both
humid and dry climates from sea level to 2000 m. The
optimum temperature required for guava cultivation and
high yield of good quality fruit ranges from 20° to 30°C.
Low winter temperatures during the dry season lead to
natural defoliation, and flowering will commence as soon
as warm weather and rainfall induce new growth flushes
and fruit set.
The ideal rainfall pattern for guava is alternating dry
and wet conditions. Drought and low humidity during
flowering can drastically reduce fruit set. Guava does
best with abundant moisture (1,000 to 2,000 mm rain-
fall), although is tolerates drought. Guavas develop the
best eating quality when they mature during dry period
(mostly in winter). Some guava cultivars produce more
heavily in areas with distinct winter seasons than in
the deep tropics. Further, the guava can benefit from
windbreaks because new flushes grow more vigorously
after windbreaks. 
Soil 
The guava is a hardy plant that grows in most soil types.
It responds well to soils with good drainage and high
organic matter. Loam and alluvial types of soil is most
ideal. Guava prefer a well-drained soil in the pH range
of 5 to 7. Guava is fairly tolerant to soil salinity. While
guava trees tolerate poor soils, fruit production is substan-
tially enhanced when grown in rich soils under proper
management.
2.2.2 Establishing an Organic
Guava Orchard
Suitable Races and Cultivars
The common guava is a diploid (2n = 22), but natural and
artificial triploids (2n = 33), tetraploids (2n = 44; species El
Salvador), hexaploids (2n = 66; species from Costa Rica)
and aneuploid exist. Triploids generally produce seedless
fruits. Seedlings from hexaploid var. littorale are extremely
uniform in plant and fruit characteristics. Seedling trees of
most guava cultivars vary in vigour and size, bearing habit,
and fruit yield, shape, size, quality, maturity season, and
storage ability. Natural cross pollination so common in
guava cultivars is responsible for the variability observed in
seedling trees 
There are three distinct types guava cultivars: 
< Dessert Types: produce less acidic fruits with 
mostly white flesh and appealing surface colors. 
This group includes many national and local cultivars,
such as “Mexican Cream”, “Ruby X”, “Hong Kong
Pink”, “Klom Toon”, “White Indian”, “Allahabad
Safeda”, “Lucknow 49 (Sardar)”, “Red Fleshed”,
“Chittidar”, “Nasik”, “Tathem White”, “Supreme” 
and “Elisabeth”. 
< Processing Types: They produce strong acidic fruit
usually with red or pink flesh and a high percentage of
pulp recovery, for example, “Pink acid”, “Patillo” and
“Ka Hua Kula”.
< Dual Purpose yield fruits with a compromise 
between the processing and the dessert types like
“Beaumont”, “Etheridge Selection”, “Oakey Pink”,
and “Fanretief ”. 
Selection objectives in breeding programs include
yield, fruit quality (aroma, vitamin C content, number
of seed etc.), vigorous spreading and low-growth type
as well as resistance to pests and diseases. For organic
producers, the last two selection objectives are of basic
importance. However, still only a few specific resistant
cultivars are available. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
69
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Flowering Induction and Pollination
Guava produces flowers on new vegetative shoots
arising from mature wood. Thus, in mild tropical or
subtropical climates, guava flowers and fruits contin-
uously throughout the year if water and temperatures
do not become limiting factors. Rainfall after drought
induces tree growing and flowering. Therefore, in
many tropical countries, guava has two flowering
peaks parallel to the rainy seasons. These natural
peaks can be altered by cultural manipulations.
Since flowers are produced on new branches, factors
that stimulate new growth, such as pruning, irrigation
and fertilization, stimulate flowering. It is beneficial
to give guava trees rest (an off season) by withholding
irrigation water periodically. The practice of pruning,
irrigation and fertilization at the end of harvest is
essential in cycling that concentrates harvest periods.
Defoliation with hormones (e.g. gibberellic acid,
ethephon) in order to induce new growth is not
allowed in organic guava production. 
Few problems with pollination and fruit set occur with
most guava clones. Fruit set in the triploid cultivars is good
when grown together with diploid clones as a pollen source.
Bees are the principal pollinators of guava. Organic standards
do not permit the application of plant hormones to increase
fruit set and reduce seeds.
Propagation and Planting
Guava is easily grown from seeds but seedling trees are
variable in fruit quality and take longer to fruit. Seed germi-
nation is used to produce seedlings in breeding programs or
to produce rootstocks for grafting of desirable cultivars.
Propagation is largely by vegetative means and the most
satisfactory method is budding. In budgrafting the stock
plants are first sown from seeds directly into individual
polythene bags. After they have attained pencil size the
stock plants are ready for grafting. The grafted seedling is
ready for transplanting 2 – 3 months later. Several clonal
methods are applied. 
When providing trees, it is of crucial importance to order
certified trees where the absence of diseases, pests, viruses
and authenticy of rootstock and cultivar are guaranteed. In
different organic label regulations the use of trees from
certified organic nurseries is compulsory from 2004 on.
Currently, the detailed regulations e.g. for the case where
organic trees are not available, are very dynamic. Therefore,
the actual regulations should be checked carefully with the
certification body before ordering any plantlets. 
Establishment of Orchards 
Two basically different guava production systems are
applied by organic growers: Growing guava in orchards or
in fruit gardens and agroforestry systems. 
In orchards, trees can be planted from 2.5 to 8 m in any
combination for rows and tree spacing. Commonly tree
spacings in organic guava orchards are wider compared to
conventional orchards – for example 5 x 6 m – with trees
established along the contours. Intensive systems for guava
growing (up to 73,000 trees/ha with 45 x 30 cm distance)
are practiced in the combination with the use of growth
regulators for plant size control. Organic standards prohibit
growth regulators, therefore such intensive systems are not
suitable for organic guava production. 
A few months before planting guava trees, organic
growers can saw in vigorous legumes (e.g. Canavalia sp. or
Cayanur cayan) and later mulch them shortly before planting
the guava trees. Planting holes of 0.6 m x 0.6 m x 0.6 m
are dug and into each hole compost or organic manure is
incorporated and – if necessary – rock phosphate. Trees
have to be hardened in the direct sun for several weeks
before transplanting. Shade is provided for the young
plants immediately after planting, and watering is done
regularly during dry weather until the trees are well
established.
Guava trees also are grown in extensive fruit gardens
and as one of the mixed crops in agroforestry systems. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
70
2.2.3 Soil and Weed Management
Weed management is crucial during the first 2 – 3 years of
orchard establishment. After that, the canopy of the trees
provides adequate shade to minimize interference by weeds. 
The soil underneath and around the young tree should
be maintained free of all weeds and grasses, since the
young tree cannot compete well for water and nutrients
until it is much larger. Organic mulches, such as straw,
dried grass or compost, are excellent for use under guava
trees to eliminate weeds and to conserve moisture.
Organic mulches are also suitable for adult bearing trees
and the method of choice of most organic guava growers.
Some organic growers cover the soil with leguminous cover
plants in order to enrich the soil with nitrogen, organic matter
and to promote soil-microbial life (see chapter 1.2). 
2.2.4 Tree Nutrition and Fertilization
When trees in an orchard begin to produce commercial
quantities of fruit, fertilizer is usually given after harvest,
together with pruning and irrigation to encourage new
growth. It takes about 4.5 – 5 month from floral initiation
to fruit maturation. Organic fertilizer  should therefore be
applied around 4 – 4.5 month before expected harvest period,
adjusted to the prevailing temperatures and moisture.
Organic fertilizer is applied around 2 weeks before highly
soluble chemical fertilizers in order to give to the soil-
micro-organisms time to mineralize organically  bound
nitrogen. In subtropical climates where winter tempera-
tures are relatively low, only one major crop season
occurs and fertilization is adjusted accordingly.7
7 For more details in organic fertilization techniques please refer to
chapter 1.2
The following optimal foliar levels guide guava fertilization
(% on the basis of dry matter): 
< Nitrogen: 1.7 %;
< Phosphorous: 0.25 %;
< Potassium: 1.5 %:
2.2.5 Water Management and
Irrigation
Although the guava can tolerate low moisture condition and
long dry periods, a constant availability will promote fast
growth and leaf flushes. Lack of moisture will delay bloom
and cause the fruit to drop.
Drip irrigation is increasingly being used to satisfy
daily water needs. In large orchards, where irrigation
is done by sections, the microjet or a low-sprinkler
system is more suitable. Both systems are suitable for
organic guava production. However, fertigation is not
permitted.
2.2.6 Freeze Protection
Freeze protection is essential for survival of young
guava trees in subtropical regions with cold winters. Soil
banks are excellent for freeze protection for several years:
put them up in late autumn and remove them in spring.
Protection of the top can be achieved using covers such as
blankets or loans; the cover is draped over the tree, the
corners pulled outward and anchored to the ground. It
is neither necessary nor desirable that the cover reach
the ground.
In regions with severe cold, an additional heat source
would be needed. This is not desirable in organic agricul-
ture due to high energy consumption. If the climate is not
suitable for guava production, other crops should be
planted.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
71
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
2.2.7 Pruning and Fruit Thinning
The guava plant grows symmetrically dome-shaped with
broad, spreading, low-branching canopy and a shallow-
rooted small tree of 3 to 10 m in height, branching close to
the ground and often heavily suckering from the base of the
trunk. A single trunk tree is developed by proper pruning
and training. 
The young guava tree is usually trained 3 to 4 months
after field planting. Pruning begins at an early stage of
plant growth to develop single trunk trees with well-spaced
branches. 
Bearing guava need constant training and pruning to
provide the desired tree shape for ease of management
and for the health of the tree and to maximize fruit
production. Larger fruit are primarily produced on vigorous
shoots of two to three years of age. Most guava trees,
whether propagated from seed or grafts, produce an
abundance of suckers which should be removed from the
trunk up to 50 cm above ground. A framework of four
branches representing four quarters of the tree should be
established. The crotch angles between the branches and
the main stem should be wide enough to facilitate adequate
light penetration and provide physical strength to support
fruit load at maturity. A flat tree shape reduces labor for
orchard management such as fruit thinning, fruit bagging
and harvesting.
Some growers prefer intense pruning immediately
after harvest, other growers prefer regular but light
pruning of unwanted wood. Since guava bears fruit on
new growth from mature wood, it is important to keep a
balance between the amount of vegetative growth and
mature wood to ensure production the next season, and
maintain fruiting regularity. Pruning induces growth of
new flushes upon which flowers will be produced.
Branches grown horizontally are more productive than
vertical ones.
Since healthy guava trees grow and fruit abundantly,
there is always a chance for breakage of branches supporting
the heavy loads of fruits. Thinning in the early stages of
fruit growth increases the size of remaining fruits, reduces
trunk breakage, and promotes regular bearing. Hand
thinning is the only applied procedure for organic guava
production, since chemical thinning agents are not allowed
in this production method.
2.2.8 Pest and Disease Management
Pest Management
A number of pests attack the guava such as the fruit fly,
thrips, mealy bugs, scale insects, spider mites, aphids etc.
There are several species of parasitic wasps and predators
that keep scale insects and mealy bugs under reasonable
control. However, some insects cause damage to guava cul-
tivars, in particular thrips and fruit flies. Birds or fruit bats
also usually attack mature guava fruit. 
Organic pest and disease management prioritizes
indirect control methods. Direct control methods are
applied with second priority (see chapter 2.1.9).
Disease Management
Some diseases are specific to certain countries and others
are widespread where guavas are grown. In many cases,
they do not cause economic damage. Anthracnose and
Mucor fruit rot are widespread and considered important
diseases in most countries. Organic growers first make
use of indirect center methods before applying direct
control methods.
Fruit rots (Phytophthora parasitica, Botryodiplodia
sp., and Dothiorella sp.) and fruit canker (Pestalotia
psidii) can be serious pests on rainy season guava crops in
humid areas.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
72
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
73
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 6: 
Examples of Guava Pests and Organic Control Methods
Pests Important to Know Organically Control Methods
Ceratitis capitata • Flies are attracted to the maturing fruit where 1. Fruit bagging along with thinning 2 month after flowering can significantly reduce the attack  
(Mediterranean fruit fly), they deposit their eggs 2. Field hygiene 
Dacus dorsalis • The eggs hatch and develop within the fruit, – Mass trapping (combination of food baits with organic insecticides, such as Spionosad)  
(Oriental fruit fly), causing a break down of the fruit tissue – Release of the braconid parasite Diachasmimorpha tryoni and nematodes 
Dacus cucurbitae • Cause fruit rot – Sterile insect technology (STI) is not permitted in organic agriculture 
(melon fruit fly), 
Ceratitis rosa
(Natal fruit fly), 
Anastrepha suspensa 
(Caribbean fruit fly),
Anastrepha ludens
(Mexican fruit fly)
Selenothrips • Attacks leaf and fruit 3. Natural enemies can keep thrips under fair control
rubrocinctus • Cause silvering of leaves and scarification 4. Resistant cultivars: Allahabad Safeda; for example Ruby x Supreme, Lucknow-49
(Read-banded thrips) of the fruit
• Fruit become mummified
Cosinoptycha • has the potential to produce a population • Use lures containing pheromones. Pheromones.are produced by the female guava moth to attract males 
improbana explosion for mating. Traps containing these pheromone lures can disrupt the mating ability of the moth
(guava moth or fruit 
drilling caterpillar)
Indarbela quadrinotata • Attacks bark • Naturally occurring parasites
(Bark-eating caterpillar) 
Table 7: 
Some Guava Diseases and Organic Management
Disease Important to Know Indirect Control Direct Control
Colletotrichum • Small brown to black spots on the fruit; • Adequate drainage; • Spraying with Bordeaux mixture; 
gloeosporioides • rotting of ripe fruit mainly in the rainy season;
(Anthracnose)
Botrytis cinerea • Attacks fruit; • Calcium application to guavas largely • Spraying with Bordeaux mixture; 
(Blossom end rot) alleviates this disease;
Mucor hiemalis • Water soaked areas on fruit, later covers • Removing fallen fruit from the field at 2-4-day 
(Mucor rot) with yellowish mycelina; intervals; 
• Commonly associated with fruit-fly oviposition • Crushing under foot during harvest or light 
wounds; rolling the orchard floor; 
• Low acid, sweet cultivars are more tolerant 
than acid types;
Fusarium solani • Attack root; • Avoid planning on infected soils;
(Fusarium wilt)
Fruit scab • Affects immature fruits by causing a corky • All preventive measures; • Spraying with Bordeaux mixture;
brown layer all over the fruits;
• This will cause the fruits to be unattractive 
and unmarketable;
Cephaleuros virescens • Causes rust-like blemishes on the fruit and • Suitable pruning will help to reduce these • Spraying with Bordeaux mixture; 
(Algal spots) leaf surface; diseases (ventilation);
• Dark necrotic blemishes are left on the fruit
2.2.9 Harvesting and Post Harvest
Handling
In tropical regions, guava is available throughout the year,
although not always in the same quantities. Guava fruits are
harvested when they change color from green to light green.
Depending on guava cultivar and the growing conditions, it
takes about 100 to 150 days from bloom to fruit harvest. Ripe
guava fruits measure 4 to 10 cm and weight from 100 to 450 g.
Ripe fruit has a thin greenish-yellow skin and a flesh of vary-
ing thickness that may be white, yellow-pink or red. Flavor and
aroma vary widely, from low-acid, sweet to low sugar and high-
acidity types. Most of the famous cultivars contain numerous
small, hard, yellowish-cream colored seeds that are imbedded
in the soft pulp (there are a few seedless cultivars).
Where labor is available, young fruit destined for the
fresh-fruit market are wrapped with newspaper or bagged
in paper when about one and a half months old. This not
only protects them from fruit fly attacks, but also improves
their color and protects them from abrasion during fruit
development. However, bagging promotes conditions for
fungal diseases and therefore has to be done with care when
dealing with organic guava growths. Plastic bags are not
suitable in organic guava production for the same reason.
Harvesting is done manually. Dessert fruit are harvested
mature green and carefully handled to avoid injury, graded
to size and packed carefully in the carton for shipment.
Processing fruit should be picked at the firm yellow half-
ripe stage. Harvesting intervals should not exceed 3 – 4 days
or losses from over-ripe fruits occur. Immature guavas do
not ripen off the trees; fruits may soften, but never develop
abundant color, and typical flavor associated with good
eating enjoyment. Over-ripe fruits drop; they should be
collected and destroyed rather than left to rot in the field in
order to remove sources of new pest and disease infection.
Fruit yields depend upon cultivars, design of the orchard
(density) and weather conditions. The yield may start at 10 tons
per hectare in the third year of production and increase to
30 tons per hectare after the tenth year. The average lies around
80-90 kg/tree. Experiences in organic managed guava orchards
do not show a significant yield reduction after conversion.
Post-Harvest Handling 
Guava is well suited to processing. The sweeter selections
are more commonly eaten fresh, while the stronger flavored
selections are more commonly used in jam, jelly, paste and
other products.
Fresh fruit
Mature green fruit held at 20°C develops fully-yellow skin
color in 6-8 days. Fruit packed in polyethylene bags can be
stored at temperatures of 8 – 10 °C for 14 days and be 100%
marketable. Ethylene can be used on mature green fruit to
accelerate ripening (ethylene for ripening is allowed in
organic agriculture). 
Guava fruits should be packed in the natural posture
(with the pedicel end of the fruit kept upward) in order to
retain better quality for longer periods of time. Fruits for
the fresh fruit market should be wrapped individually in
paper towels and packed in padded layers before shipping
or refrigeration. Wrapping of guava fruits suppresses
weight loss and preserves glossiness. Storage of wrapped
guavas at cool temperatures extends post-harvest life up to
5 weeks, with retention of healthy fruit quality and no signif-
icant reduction in nutrient contents; however, fruits stored
unwrapped lose moisture and shininess. Desiccation,
browning of fruit skin tissue with concomitant loss of flesh
firmness, and the high rate of physiological weight loss
limit the storage life of guava fruit. 
Juice Processing
Fruit for processing should be held at 15°C to allow for gradual
ripening. Organic processing requires aseptic methods or hot
filling of containers as wells as freezing as a means of preserving
the products without the addition of preservatives. Aseptic
methods are advantageous as no refrigeration is required.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
74
2.3. Lychee
The lychee is the most renowned of a group of edible fruits
from the soapberry family, Sapindaceae. It is botanically
designated Litchi chinensis Sonn. (Nephelium litchi
Cambess) and widely known as litchi.
This fruit originates from southern China, where more
than 100 varieties are known. Nowadays, it is grown in
almost all subtropical regions where the climate and soil is
suitable. However, China is the leading center of lychee
production.
2.3.1 Ecological Requirements
Lychees require seasonal temperature variations for best
flowering and fruiting. Warm, humid summers are best for
flowering and fruit development, and a certain amount of
winter chilling is necessary for flower bud development.
Lychees thrive best in regions with dry and cool winters but
without heavy frost. Most cultivars are sensitive to frost
except for the centuries-old “Chen-Tze” or “Royal Chen
Purple” cultivar, renamed “Brewster” in Florida. This
variety originates from the northern perimeter of the
lychee-growing area in China. It is able to withstand light
frost and has proven very successful in the Lake Placid area
of Central Florida.
The summer should not be too hot, and humidity during
fruit development should not be too high. Water require-
ments are high (about 1.500 mm), thus in areas with long
dry periods, irrigation is necessary. In China and India,
lychees are grown between 15° and 30° N. The lychee
thrives best on the lower plains where the summer months
are hot and wet and the winter months are dry and cool.
Heavy frosts will kill young trees but mature trees can
withstand light frosts. The cold tolerance of the lychee is
intermediate, lying between that of sweet orange at one
extreme and mango and avocado on the other. Location,
land slope, and proximity to bodies of water can make a
great difference in the degree of damage inflicted by frost.
Heavy rain or fog during the flowering period is detri-
mental, as are hot, dry, strong winds that cause shedding of
flowers and also splitting of the fruit skin. Splitting also
occurs during spells of alternating rain and hot, dry periods,
occuring with frequency on the sunny side of the tree.
Soil
Lychees prefer an acidic soil, as do most tropical fruit trees.
A soil pH between 5.5 and 7.5 is acceptable, but plants
grow much better in soils with a pH at the low end of this
range. Soil pH plays an important role in the nutritional
health of a tree, particularly with respect to the trees’ ability
to absorb minor elements such as iron. Organic material
in the soil generates humic acids as it breaks down. These
naturally occurring acids help to lower the soil pH and
promote a healthier growing environment.
The soil should be fertile, profound and well drained.
However, lychees grow well on a wide range of soils. In
China they are cultivated in sandy or clayey loam, “river
mud”, moist sandy clay, and even heavy clay.
However, in an early experiment in a greenhouse in
Washington, D.C., seedlings planted in acid soil showed
superior growth and the roots had many nodules colonized
by mycorrhizal fungi. This caused some to speculate that
inoculation might be desirable.
The lychee attains maximum growth and productivity
on deep alluvial loam but flourishes in extreme southern
Florida on oolitic limestone providing it is placed in an
adequately sized planting hole and irrigated in dry
seasons. If lychee trees are grown in limestone (high
pH) soil it may be necessary to apply a foliar spray of
minor elements, of which chelated iron is the most
important component.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
75
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
The Chinese often plant the lychee on the banks of
ponds and streams. In low, wet land, they dig ditches 10 to
15 ft (3-4.5 m) wide and 30 to 40 ft (9-12 m) apart, using
the excavated soil to form raised beds on which lychee trees
are planted so that they have perfect drainage and perma-
nently moist soil. Though the lychee has a high water
requirement, it cannot tolerate waterlogging. The water
table should be at least 1.2-1.8 m below the surface and the
underground water should flow as stagnant water induces
root rot. The lychee can occasionally stand brief flooding
better than citrus. It will not thrive under saline conditions.
The root crown of a lychee tree must not be buried. This
general rule applies to almost all trees. The root crown is
the zone of plant tissue at the base of the tree between
where the roots leave off and the trunk begins. If this area
is buried by non-porous soil it will lead to the death of
the tree.
2.3.2 Establishing of Organic Lychee
Orchard
Suitable Varieties
Professor Groff, in his book: The Lychee and the Lungan
tells us that the production of superior types of lychee is a
matter of great family pride and local rivalry in China,
where the fruit is esteemed as no other. In 1492, a list of 40
lychee varieties, mostly named for families, was published
in the Annals of Fukien. 
The Chinese claim that the lychee is highly variable
under different cultural and soil conditions. Professor Groff
concluded that one could catalog 40 or 50 varieties as
recognized in Kwangtung, but there were only 15 distinct,
widely known and commercial varieties grown in that
province, half of them marketed in season in the City of
Canton. Some of these are classed as “mountain” types; the
majority are “water types” (grown in low, well-irrigated
land). There is a special distinction between the kinds of
lychee that leak juice when the skin is broken and those that
retain the juice within the flesh. The latter are called
“dry- and -clean” and are highly prized. There is much
variation in form (round, egg-shaped or heart-shaped), skin
color and texture, the fragrance and flavor and even the
color of the flesh, the amount of “rag” in the seed cavity
and, of prime importance, the size and form of the seed. 
Propagation and Nursery Management
Lychees do not reproduce faithfully from seed, and the
choicest have abortive, not viable, seed. Furthermore,
lychee seeds remain viable only 4 to 5 days, and seedling
trees will not bear until they are 5 to 12, or even 25, years
old. For these reasons, seeds are planted mostly for selection
and breeding purposes or for rootstock. 
Attempts to grow the lychee from cuttings have been
generally discouraging, though 80% success has been
claimed with spring cuttings in full sun, under constant
mist and given weekly liquid nutrients. Ground-layering
has been practiced to some extent. In China, air-layering
(marcotting, or gootee) is the most popular means of prop-
agation and has been practiced for ages. In this method, a
branch of a chosen tree is girdled, allowed to callus for 1 to 2
days and then is enclosed in a ball of sticky mud mixed with
chopped straw or dry leaves and wrapped with burlap. With
frequent watering, roots develop in the mud and, in about
100 days, the branch is cut off, the ball of earth is increased to
about 30 cm in width, and the air-layer is kept in a sheltered
nursery for a little over a year, then gradually exposed to
full sun before it is set out in the orchard. Some air-layers
are planted in large clay pots and grown as ornamentals. 
The Chinese method of air-layering has many variations.
In fact, 92 modifications have been recorded and experi-
mented in Hawaii. Inarching is also an ancient custom,
selected cultivars being joined to “Mountain” lychee
rootstock. 
In order to make air-layering less intensive-intensive,
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
76
to eliminate the watering, and also to produce portable,
shippable layers, Colonel Grove, after much experimen-
tation, developed the technique of packing the girdle with
wet sphagnum moss and soil, wrapping it in moisture-
proof clear plastic that permits exchange of air and gasses,
and tightly securing it above and below. In about 6 weeks,
sufficient roots are formed to permit detaching of the
layer, removal of the plastic wrap, and planting in soil
in nursery containers. This is possible on air-layer
branches up to 10 cm thick, where 200 to 300 layers are
taken from a large tree. 
Studies in Mexico have led to the conclusion that, for
maximum root formation, branches to be air-layered should
not be less than 15 mm in diameter, and, to avoid undue
defoliation of the parent tree, should not exceed 20 mm.
The branches of any age around the periphery of the canopy
and exposed to the sun make better air-layers with greater
root development than branches taken from shaded
positions on the tree. The application of growth regulators
at various rates has shown no significant effect on root
development in the Mexican experiments. In India, some of
the various auxins tried stimulated root formation and
forced early maturity of the layers; contributing, however,
to high mortality. South African horticulturists believe that
tying the branch up so that it is nearly vertical induces
vigorous rooting.
The new trees, with about half of the top trimmed off
and supported by stakes, are kept in a shade house for
6 weeks before setting out. Improvements in Colonel
Grove’s system later included the use of constant mist in
the shade house. Also, it was found that birds pecked at
the young roots showing through the transparent wrap-
ping, made holes in the plastic and caused dehydration. It
became necessary to shield the air-layers with a cylinder
of newspaper or aluminum foil. As time went on, some
people switched to foil in place of plastic for wrapping the
air-layers.
The air-layered trees will fruit in 2 to 5 years after
planting. Professor Groff said that a lychee tree is not in
its prime until it is 20 to 40 years old; it will continue
bearing a good crop for 100 years or longer. One disad-
vantage of air-layering is that the resultant trees have
weak root systems. In China, a crude method of cleft-
grafting has long been employed for special purposes,
but, generally speaking, the lychee has been considered
very difficult to graft. Bark, tongue, cleft, and side-veneer
grafting, also chip-and shield-budding, have been tried by
various experimenters in Florida, Hawaii, South Africa
and elsewhere with varying degrees of success. The
lychee is peculiar in that the entire cambium is active only
during the earliest phases of secondary growth. The use
of very young rootstocks, only 6 mm in diameter and
wrapped at the union with strips of vinyl plastic film, have
given good results. A 70% success rate has been achieved
in splice-grafting in South Africa. Hardened-off, non-
terminal wood from young branches 6 mm thick is first
ringed and the bark-ring removed. After a delay of 21
days, the branch is cut off at the ring, defoliated but
leaving the base of each petiole, then a slanting cut is
made in the rootstock 30 cm above the soil at the point
where it matches the thickness of the graftwood scion. As
many leaves as possible are retained. The cut is trimmed
to a perfectly smooth surface 2.5 cm long; the scion is
then trimmed to 10 cm long, making a slanting cut
to match that on the rootstock. The scion should have
2 slightly swollen buds. After joining the scion and the
rootstock, the union is wrapped with plastic grafting tape
and the scion is completely covered with grafting strips to
prevent dehydration. In 6 weeks the buds begin to swell,
and the plastic is slit just above the bud to permit
sprouting. When the new growth has hardened off, all the
grafting tape is removed. The grafting is performed in a
moist, warm atmosphere. The grafted plants are maintained
in containers for 2 years or more before planting out, and
they develop strong taproots. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
77
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
2.3.3. Soil and Weed Management 
The first step in establishing a lychee orchard is to examine
the soil for suitability in respect of depth, drainage and
compacted layers. It should preferably be 1 to 2 m deep.
Subsequently, the soil needs to be prepared according to the
results of the soil analysis, especially when large quantities
of lime are required. 
If the soil is suitable for lychee production, it must be pre-
pared well in advance. Before planting, the soil must be tilled
as deep and as thoroughly as possible so that it will not be
necessary to make the planting holes too big. If the soil is very
acid, heavy lime applications may be necessary. Two-thirds of
the recommended quantity of lime must be scattered over the
planting area, mixed with the topsoil and then ploughed in as
deep as possible, at least 9 to 12 months before planting.
Calcium (lime) moves very slowly downwards into the soil
and must therefore be worked in to the depth of the root zone.
A cover crop can then be planted and ploughed in about
6 months to improve the organic matter content of the soil.
The remaining lime (one third) and all the required phos-
phate must be scattered and incorporated at the same time.
The trees can be planted 3 months later. 
If a lighter lime application (2- 4 t/ha) is required, the
lime can be worked into the soil at least 3 months before
planting and phosphate 1 month before planting. 
Planting and Spacing
It should be remembered that lychee trees have a long life
and grow tall. A 25-year-old tree can reach a crown diame-
ter of 12 m. If trees are too widely spaced and later become
uncontrollably large, an economic yield will not be possi-
ble. If the trees are to be spaced closely together, size must
be controlled from the start by pruning.
Young trees should not be planted too close together.
Portions of the tree shaded by other trees will not bear fruit.
For maximum productivity, there must be full exposure to
light on all sides. For a permanent orchard, the trees are
best-spaced 12 m apart each way. In India, about 9 m
spacing is considered adequate, probably because the drier
climate limits the overall growth. In South Africa the ideal
planting distance is 9 x 6 m. In the Cook Islands, the
trees are planted on a 12 x 6 m spacing–56 trees per acre
(134 per ha)–but in the 15th year, the plantation is thinned
to 12 x l2 m. 
In Florida, it has been reported that the optimal
spacing for a lychee tree is a 15’ (4.5 m) radius from the
center of the trunk in all directions. If you leave 10 or
more feet (3 m) access between rows, a row spacing of
40’ (12m) is implied.
Contrary to the above, it is reported that dense plantings
have become popular in China. The number of trees per ha
was increased from 150 to 330 or 495 by reducing tree
spacing to 6m x 5m and 5m x 4m, respectively. Such a
dense plantation requires more frequent fertilization,
irrigation and pruning. Lychee trees are compressed to a
height and diameter of approximately two meters by means
of heavy pruning after harvest. This results in the trees
reaching peak production earlier (after six years).
Planting theTrees 
Lychee trees can be transplanted any time of the year, but
the best time is during spring or at the beginning of the
rainy season. Planting holes should be square (in deep-
ploughed soil 300 x 500 mm and in nonploughed soil 500
x 500 mm) and the bottom of the hole should be filled with
a mix of topsoil and compost. 
The roots of young trees must not be damaged during
planting. After planting, the soil is slightly compressed by
standing on it and wetted before mulch is placed around the
newly-transplanted tree. Subsequently, the young trees
have to be irrigated regularly. They must never suffer from
a water shortage or too wet conditions.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
78
Blooming and Pollination 
Lychee flowers best with days below 20°C. The inflorescence
is determinant.  Small white to greenish-yellow flowers are
produced on the current season’s wood in terminal clusters.
They are present from mid-February through March in the
northern hemisphere and mid-August-September in the
southern hemisphere.
There are 3 types of flowers appearing in irregular
sequence or, at times simultaneously, in the lychee inflo-
rescence: a) male; b) hermaphrodite, fruiting as female
(about 30% of the total); c) hermaphrodite fruiting as male.
The latter tend to possess the most viable pollen. Many of
the flowers have defective pollen, and this fact probably is
the main cause of the abortive seeds and also the common
problem of shedding of young fruits. The flowers require
transfer of pollen by insects. 
In India, L.B. Singh recorded 11 species of bees, flies,
wasps and other insects as visiting lychee flowers for
nectar. But honeybees, mostly Apis cerana indica, A.
dorsata and A. florea, constitute 78% of the lychee-
pollinating insects, and they work the flowers for pollen
and nectar from sunrise to sundown. A. cerana is the only
hive bee and is essential in commercial orchards for
maximum fruit production. 
A 6-week survey in Florida revealed 27 species of
lychee-flower visitors, representing 6 different insect
Orders. Most abundant, morning and afternoon, was the
secondary screw-worm fly (Callitroga macellaria), an
undesirable pest. Next was the imported honeybee
(Apis mellifera) seeking nectar daily but only during the
morning and apparently not interested in the pollen. No
wild bees were seen on the lychee flowers, though wild
bees were found in large numbers collecting pollen in
an adjacent fruit-tree planting a few weeks later. Third
in order, but not abundant, was the soldier beetle
(Chauliognathus marginatus). The rest of the insect
visitors were present only in insignif icant numbers.
Maintenance of beehives in Florida lychee groves is
necessary to enhance fruit set and development. The
fruits mature 2 months after flowering.
Fruit set in lychee is climate dependent and profoundly
affected by temperature and humidity. It varies greatly
within panicles, and ranges from 1-50 percent of the female
flowers produced. Reproductive failure is common and not
always explainable. In some years, certain cultivars pro-
duce few, or only male flowers; as a result, little or no fruit
is set. This problem can be minimized through the use of bet-
ter-adapted varieties and management methods to retard
growth and induce flowering. Winter/spring temperature
extremes that affect bloom phenology and unsettled weather
that limit bee flight during bloom have been identified as
other causes of reproductive failure.
Wind Protection:
Perhaps the single greatest enemy of developing lychee
trees is wind. Even a moderate amount of wind (> 15mph)
will damage new branches and leaves. Young trees benefit
greatly from wind protection. This can be provided by
placing stakes around each small tree and stretching cloth
around them as protection against wind. In very windy
locations, the entire plantation may be protected by trees
planted as windbreaks, but these should not be so close as
to shade the lychees. Some growers report that they have
successfully used bananas as wind breaks between the trees
because they grow fast and are hardy. Besides acting as
attractive wind breaks, bananas produce a lot of organic
material that falls on the ground adjacent to the lychees.
The lychee tree is structurally highly wind-resistant, having
withstood typhoons, but shelter may be needed to safeguard
the crop. During dry, hot months, lychee trees of any age
will benefit from overhead sprinkling; they are seriously
retarded by water stress.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
79
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
2.3.4. Soil Nutrition and Fertilization
Newly planted trees must be watered but not fertilized,
apart from enriching the planting hole with compost well in
advance of planting. Fertilizer should only be applied about
1 year after transplanting. The applications must be very light
and broadcast evenly, but not against the stems of the trees.
The orchard should be irrigated after applying fertilizer. 
In China, lychee trees are fertilized only twice a year
with organic material. The use of organic matter is recom-
mended for improved fruit quality. The major sources of
organic amendments in Southern China are chicken and pig
manure as well as peanut cake.
In limestone and alkaline soil, it may be necessary to
use soil sulphur and chelated iron to avoid chlorosis.
Bronzing of the leaves is evidence of zinc deficiency. 
In certified organic production, according the EU-
Regulation 2092/91, the need for applying sulphur and
trace elements like boron, cobalt, copper, iron, manganese,
molybdenum and zinc must be recognized through the
inspection body.
Mulch
Organic mulch, such as that derived from yard waste and
chipped material, helps to promote a uniform healthy
microclimate above the roots. This reduces the stressful
cycle of wetting and drying of the root system. These
conditions also make for a healthy environment for soil
building microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi.
Most lychees are propagated as air-layers, (vegetative)
and as such develop a shallow root system that spreads
across the surface without a deep taproot. The decaying
organic matter in mulch assists in acidifying the soil, which
is especially important in limestone soils.
Mulching effectively enhances the root shading properties
of lychee trees.
2.3.5. Pruning 
Ordinarily, the tree is not pruned after the judicious
shaping of the young plant because the clipping off of a
branch tip with each cluster of fruits is sufficient to promote
new growth for the next crop. Severe pruning of old trees
may be done to increase fruit size and yield for at least a
few years.
However, it has also been reported that trees that have
been pruned back about 15 cm after harvesting tend to pro-
duce more fruit in subsequent years. Pruning of the older
growth stimulates new growth on all of the meristematic
terminal ends. Remember that the bloom spikes form on
recent growth that has “hardened off ” within the last sever-
al months. V-shaped crotches should be avoided because of
the wood’s brittle nature.
One objective of pruning should be to encourage the
tree to achieve the optimal hemispherical growth habit.
This shape will provide the best shade to the root system
and encourage a healthier tree overall. Another benefit
of shading the root system out to the drip line of the tree is
that the shade deters the undergrowth of weeds, grass and
undesirable volunteers that rob essential nutrients.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
80
Table 8: 
The Use of Kraal or Chicken Manure 
in South Africa for Lychee Trees
Tree age Kraal manure Time of application
(years) (kg/tree/year)
1 5 ± 1 kg every 6 weeks during summer
2 - 3 15 Give 5 equal dressings during summer
4 - 5 25
6 - 7 40 Give 1/2 the quantity before blossoming 
8 - 9 55 and the remainder after harvesting
10 - 11 70
12 - 13 80
Maximum 100
2.3.6. Water Management and
Irrigation
The lychee will not tolerate standing water, but requires
very moist soil, so the tree needs to be watered regularly
when it is growing actively. In sandy soils, short irrigation
cycles with small quantities of water are usually effective.
In clay soils water is available for longer periods, but it is
important that the soil does not become too wet or too dry.
The trees are very sensitive to damage from salts in the soil
or in water, which is why the soil has to be leached regularly.
Lychee trees need regular watering and therefore it is
essential that enough water must be available from the
flowering stage until after the flush of growth following the
harvest. Because the edible portion of the lychee fruit has a
water content of 86%, the availability of water remains
important during fruit development. Water shortage will
delay development of the fruit and adversely affect the size,
mass and quality of the lychees.
During dormancy irrigation should be reduced, but the
tree should not suffer drought. Producers normally stop
irrigating the trees during the coldest months of the year so
that they can have a proper dormant period. In areas where
it is never very cold, irrigation should stop to force the trees
into dormancy. Young trees that are not producing yet are
irrigated throughout the year. 
2.3.7. Pest and Disease Management
Diseases 
Few diseases have been reported from any lychee-growing
locality. The glossy leaves are very resistant to fungi. In
Florida, lychee trees are occasionally subject to green scurf,
or algal leaf spot (Cephaleuros virescens), leaf blight
(Gleosporium sp.), die-back, caused by Phomopsis sp., and
mushroom root rot, (Clitocybe tabescens) which is most
likely to attack lychee trees planted where oak trees
formerly stood. Old oak roots and stumps have been
found thoroughly infected with the fungus.
In India, leaf spot caused by Pestalotia pauciseta
may be prevalent in December. Leaf spots caused by
Botryodiplodia theobromae and Colletotrichum gloeospo-
rioides, that begin at the tip of the leaflet, were first noticed
in India in 1962.
Lichens and algae commonly grow on the trunks and
branches of lychee trees.
The main post-harvest problem is spoilage by the
yeast-like organism that is quick to attack warm, moist
fruits. It is important to keep the fruits dry and cool, with
good circulation of air. Avoid conditions that favor rotting.
Pests
In most areas where lychees are grown, the most serious
foliage pest is the erinose, or leaf-curl mite, Aceria litchii,
that attacks the new growth causing hairy, blister-like galls
on the upper side of the leaves, thickening, wrinkling and
distorting them, and brown, felt-like wool on the underside.
The mite apparently came to Florida on plants from Hawaii
in 1953, but has been effectively eradicated.
The most destructive enemy of the lychee in China is a
stinkbug (Tessaratoma papillosa) with bright-red markings.
It sucks the sap from young twigs and they often die; or, in
the very least, of high rate of fruit shedding occurs. This
pest is combated by shaking the trees in winter, collecting
the bugs and destroying them. Without such efforts, this
pest works havoc. 
The fruit flies, Ceratites capitata and Pterandrus rosa
make minute holes and cracks in the skin and cause internal
decay. These pests are so detrimental that growers have adopted
the practice of enclosing bunches of clusters (with most of
the leaves removed) in bags made of “wet-strength” paper or
unbleached calico 6 to 8 weeks before harvest-time.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
81
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Birds, bats and bees damage ripe fruits on the trees in
China and sometimes a stilt house is built beside a choice
lychee tree for a watchman to keep guard and ward off these
predators, or a large net may be thrown over the tree. In
Florida, birds, squirrels, raccoons and rats are prime ene-
mies. Birds have been repelled by hanging flowing metallic
ribbons on the branches which move, gleam and rattle in the
wind. Grasshoppers, crickets, and katydids may, at times,
feed heavily on the foliage. 
2.3.8. Harvesting and Post Harvest
Handling
For home use or for local markets, lychees are harvested
when fully colored; for shipment, only partly colored
lychees are chosen. The final swelling of the fruit causes
the protuberances on the skin to be less crowded and to
slightly flatten out; thus, an experienced picker will recognize
the stage of full maturity. The fruits are rarely picked singly
except for immediate eating out-of-hand, because the stem
does not normally detach without breaking the skin, causing
the fruit to spoil quickly. The clusters are usually clipped 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
82
Table 9: 
Examples of Lychee Pests and Ways to Manage them Organically
Pests Damage Control
Elephant beetle CULTURAL: Beetles can be excluded with netting of a suitable mesh size e.g. 20 mm mesh or less.
(Xylotrupes gideon) BIOLOGICAL: Manual removal from trees is sometimes undertaken. Larvae feed on rotting organic matter. 
Heavy mulching will attract beetles to lay their eggs in this material. This will increase the problem 
in subsequent seasons.
Lychee erinose mite attacks the new grown leaves causing hairy, In older trees prune as much of the infested foliage from the tree as possible and destroy it. The mite is   
or leaf-curl mite blister-like galls on the upper side of the leaves, easily spread on nursery plants especially marcots taken from infested trees. Use only clean, mite free   
(Eriophyes litchii) thickening, wrinkling and distorting them, and planting material. Where possible obtain your planting material from mite free orchards. Spread can also 
brown, felt-like wool on the underside occur by wind and bees. 
stinkbug (Tessaratoma In China it sucks the sap from young twigs and shaking the trees in winter, collecting the bugs and destroying them 
papillosa) they often die or produce high rate of fruit 
shedding
false-unicorn caterpillar feeds on the leaves is parasitized by a tachinid fly, (Thorocera floridensis) 
(Schizura ipomeae)
red spider mites infests the foliage spray extract of Tephrosia vogelii (20 g of leaves for 100 ml of water soaked overnight) and add some  
(Paratetranychus soap as a sticker
hawaiiensis).
Thrips attack the foliage preparations of neem, pyrethrum, tobacco, derris, ginger 
(Dolicothrips idicus)
The larvae of a small eats developing seeds and the pith of young twigs Sanitary practice of burning the fallen lychee leaves.
moth, Acrocerops A small parasitic wasp also helps to control this predator.
cramerella. 
aphid (Aphis occur on young plants in shaded nurseries, encourage natural enemies, spray plant extracts of derris, neem, chili or soap solution 
spiraecola) + citrus preys on flush foliage 
aphid (Toxoptera 
aurantii) + lychee bark 
scale, Pseudaulacaspis
major + white peach 
scale, P. pentagona.
fruit flies, make minute holes and cracks in the skin and enclosing bunches of clusters (with most of the leaves removed) in bags made of “wet-strength” paper   
Ceratites capitata and cause internal decay or unbleached calico 6 to 8 weeks before harvest-time 
Pterandrus rosa
with a portion of stem and a few leaves attached to prolong
freshness. Individual fruits are later clipped from the
cluster leaving a stub of stem attached. Harvesting may
need to be done every 3 to 4 days over a period of 3-4
weeks. It should never be done right after rain, as wet fruit
is very perishable. The lychee tree is not suited to the use
of ladders. High clusters are usually harvested by metal or
bamboo pruning poles. A worker can harvest 25 kg of
fruit per hour. 
Yield 
Lychee yields are commonly unreliable and erratic and
rarely approach the capacity of the tree. The yield varies
with cultivars, age, weather conditions, presence of polli-
nators, and cultural practices. In India, a 5-year-old tree
may produce 500 fruits, a 20-year-old tree 4,000 to 5,000
fruits – 73 - 150 kg. Exceptional trees have borne 455 kg
of fruit per year. One tree in Florida has borne 544 kg. In
China, there are reports of 680 kg crops. In South Africa,
25 years old trees have averaged 272 kg each in good
years; and an average yield is approximately 10,000 kg per
hectare annually.
Keeping Quality, Storage and Shipping 
Freshly picked lychees keep their color and quality only
3 to 5 days at room temperature.
Fresh fruits, picked individually by snapping the
stems and later de-stemmed during grading, and packed
in shallow, ventilated cartons with shredded-paper cush-
ioning, have been successfully shipped by air from
Florida to markets throughout the United States and also
to Canada. 
In China and India, lychees are packed in baskets or
crates lined with leaves or other cushioning. The clusters or
loose fruits are best packed in trays with protective sheets
between the layers where no more than 5 single layers
or 3 double layers are joined together. The pack should not
be too tight. Containers for stacked trays or fruits not
arranged in said manner must be fairly shallow to avoid too
much weight and crushing. Spoilage may be delayed by
moistening the fruits with a salt solution.
Lychee clusters shipped to France by air from
Madagascar have arrived in fresh condition when packed
6 kg to the carton and cushioned with leaves of the
traveler’s tree (Ravenala madagascariensis Sonn.).
Boat shipment requires hydro cooling at the plantation
at 0º-2º C, packing in sealed polyethylene bags, storing
and conveying to the port at -20º to -25º C and shipping
at 0º-2º C.
In Florida, fresh lychees in sealed, heavy-gauge
polyethylene bags keep their color for 7 days in storage or
transit at 1º-10º C. Each bag should contain no more than
15 lbs (6.8 kg) of fruit.
Lychees placed in polyethylene bags with moss, leaves,
paper shavings or cotton packing have retained fresh color
and quality for 2 weeks in storage at 7º C; for a month
at 4º C. 
At 0º-2º C and 85% to 90% relative humidity, untreated
lychees can be stored for 10 weeks; the skin will turn brown
but the flesh will be virtually in fresh condition but
sweeter.
Frozen, peeled or unpeeled, lychees in moisture-
vapour-proof containers keep for 2 years.
Drying of Lychees 
Lychees dehydrate naturally. The skin loses its original
color, becomes cinnamon-brown, and turns brittle. The
flesh turns dark-brown to nearly black as it shrivels and
becomes very much like a raisin. The skin of “Kwai Mi”
becomes very tough when dried; that of “Madras” less so.
The fruits will dry perfectly if clusters are merely hung in a
closed, air-conditioned room.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
83
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
In China, lychees are preferably dried in the sun on
hanging wire trays and brought inside at night and during
showers. Some are dried by means of brick stoves during
humid weather. 
Sun drying on coir-mesh trays took 15 days and the
results were acceptable although that thin-skinned fruits
tended to crack. It was found that shade drying for 2 days
before full exposure to the sun prevented cracking.
Dried fruits can be stored in tins at room temperature
for about a year with no change in texture or flavor.
2.4 Avocado
The center of origin of avocado (Persea americana) is in
the highlands of Mexico and Guatemala. It is now widely
distributed throughout the tropics and subtropics but the
importance and use of fruit differs from area to area. In
many countries avocado is not considered a major fruit
and is planted mostly in home gardens and as shade tree
in the orchards of high value. However, avocado is a
popular fruit in Mexico, Central America, Greater
Antilles, Chile, Spain, Canaries, Israel, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, India, Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand,
Vietnam and other countries. Only a small part of the
production in developing countries is exported, and on the
local market, the interest is limited due to the nature of its
taste and the availability of many other tropical fruits
throughout the year that are more palatable than avocado.
However, avocado has great commercial possibilities
thanks to its high nutritive value (rich in antioxidants,
vitamins E, C and A; avocado fat consists predominantly
of monounsaturated oleic acid etc.). 
Organic avocado is grown in all major avocado pro-
duction countries. In subtropical regions organic avocado is
grown in orchards as a main crop, while in tropical regions
it is a integrative part of most fruit gardens. Many hill-tribe
organic farmers in mountainous areas of Central America
and Asia have avocado trees on their farms.
Avocado generally demands only extensive crop hus-
bandry practices and responds well to organic agriculture.
A major limiting factor to avocado production in many
developing countries is the lack of certified planting
material of these good varieties. Reputable fruit nurseries
are scarce. This specif ically affects organic avocado
production, because resistant varieties and high quality
planting material is of basic importance in this production
system. Another principal obstacle in the development of
avocado is the poor recognition of avocado as a food crop
by the local population in production countries.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
84
2.4.1 Agro-ecological Requirements
and Site Selection
Climate
Avocado is a tropical to subtropical evergreen tree and has
a wide ecological distribution in these climatic regions. The
genetic diversity of the avocado, due to the three eco-races,
(see below) enables the successful production of this crop
over a wide range of environments from cool, summer-dry
Mediterranean to sub-tropical and humid tropical. Diverse
agro-climatic zones in the region offer the scope for
exploitation of off-season production opportunities.
Mexican races are tolerant to temperatures as low as –5°C.
There are varieties having higher than usual cold tolerance
(Gainesville, Winter Mexican and others), but they are not
of notable fruit quality.
Soil 
Avocados can be grown on a wide range of soil types,
but they are extremely sensitive to poor drainage and
cannot withstand water-logging. They are intolerant to
saline conditions. Optimum range of pH is from 5 to 7.
West Indian seedlings are more tolerant to salt than
Mexican seedlings, with Guatemalan having an
intermediate tolerance. 
2.4.2 Establishing an Organic
Avocado Orchard
Suitable Races and Cultivars
There are three distinct horticultural races of avocado:
West Indian (var. americana), Guatemalan (var. drymi-
folia) and Mexican (var. guatemalensis), plus hybrids
between them. Hybrids of the Guatemalan race with
the other two races include many of the more important
varieties in commerce. Pure West Indian types are
generally unsuitable for export market but preferred by
local consumers.
All three horticultural races adapted to tropical and
sub-tropical conditions. The West Indian race is well-adapted
in the humid tropics, but its hybrids with Guatemalan (e.g.
Booth selection) perform well and are considered valuable
for extending the harvest season.
In subtropical regions, hybrids of Guatemalan and
Mexican races predominate since they combine the cold
hardiness of the latter with the superior horticultural traits
of both while bringing the two seasons of maturity. 
Breeding programs include the universally desired
objectives (yield, fruit quality, vigour, adaptability etc.) and
some specific objectives for avocado. In avocado rootstock
breeding, the need of Phytophthora-resistance is recognized
as the most important objectives. Duke 7 shows moderate
resistance. In many tropical countries, locally collected
seeds are used to raise seedlings as rootstocks.
There is a large number of avocado cultivars. Hass and Fuerte
are the most widely grown cultivars. Other important cultivars
are Bacon, Zutano, Booth 7, Booth 8, Sharwil, Ettinger etc... 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
85
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 10: 
Comparison of Selected Characteristic 
of three Avocado Races
Trait West Indian Guatemalan Mexican
Climate Tropical Subtropical Semi-tropical
Cold tolerance Least Intermediate Most
Salt tolerance Most Intermediate Least
Disease resistance Higher Susceptible to Susceptible to diseases 
Verticillium wilt due to very thin skin 
Fruit bloom 5-9 months 9-12 months 6-8 months 
to maturity or more
Fruit size Variable Variable Small
Fruit color Green or reddish Green Green to purple 
or black
Skin thickness Medium Thick Very thin
Skin surface Shiny, leathery Rough and warty Waxy bloom
Seed cavity Variable Tight Loose
Oil content Low (3-10 %) High (8-15 %) Highest (up to 30 %)
Pulp flavor Sweet, mild, watery Rich Anise-like, rich
SOURCE: NAKASONE ET AL. 1998 
Flowering Types and Flowering Induction
The flowering habit of avocados is unique in that
the flowers are perfect, having both male and
female organs, but the parts do not function
together. Flowers of type A varieties (e.g. Hass,
Guatemala, Simmonds, Nadir, Lula) open in the
morning as receptive females, then close in the
afternoon until the following afternoon when
they reopen for pollen shed. In contrast, flowers
of type B avocados (e.g. Fuerte, Bacon, Zutano,
Hardee) open in the afternoon as receptive
females, close overnight and reopen the follow-
ing morning to shed pollen. If an avocado plan-
tation is to be established in a relatively new
area, the varieties to be selected for planting
should belong to both A and B groups and their
flowering must overlap to assure good pollina-
tion. The proportion of A and B group varieties
can be 1:1 or 2:1. Under some conditions, there
is suff icient overlap between the phases of a
flower type that pollination and fruit set are
rarely a problem. Flowering occurs from late
autumn to spring, depending upon the cultivar
and climate. Dry conditions during flowering
and fruit set can cause flower and young-fruit
drop. 
Propagation and Planting
Planting materials may come in the form of grafted plants
or seedlings for rootstock use. The commonly used and
preferred method for large-scale propagation is grafting.
This method is less demanding, faster and economical
in the use of scion materials. In the case of cleft-grafting, 6-
12 month old seedlings are used as rootstocks. Budwood
sticks are obtained from the season’s mature growth with
well-developed terminal buds. New shoots are formed
within three to four weeks. While in conventional agricul-
ture many avocado trees are produced in containers of soil-
less media, organic growers use compost/earth-mixtures
as media.
The use of grafted plants is limited, especially in
countries that do not have specialized avocado nurseries.
There, propagation of avocado is mainly carried out by
seed. The seeds taken from mature fruits are sown directly
in the nursery or in polyethylene bags. When 6-8 months
old, the seedlings are ready for transplanting. In many cases,
the resulting seedlings are used as rootstocks. Such
seedling trees produce 300 to 400 fruits at 10-15 years.
When providing trees, it is of crucial importance to
order certified trees where the absence of diseases, pests,
viruses and authenticy of rootstock and cultivar are guar-
anteed. In different organic label regulations the use of trees
from certified organic nurseries is compulsory from 2004
on. At present time, the detailed regulations e.g. in cases where
organic trees are not available are very dynamic. Therefore,
the actual regulations should be checked carefully with the
certification body before ordering any plantlets. 
Establishment of Avocado Orchards 
For orchard planting in flat to gently rolling terrain, the land
is cleared, ploughed deeply to break the hard subsurface
soil layer and harrowed two or three times to achieve the
desired soil tilt and to level the field. A few months before
planting avocado trees, some organic growers saw in vigorous
legumes (e.g. Canavalia sp. or Cayanur cayan) and later
mulch them shortly before planting the avocado trees. By
this measure, the soil will be enriched with organic matter
and nitrogen that in turn stimulate soil microbial activity.
For rolling land and steep slopes, plowing and harrowing
are not practiced in organic agriculture. Instead, hand forking
and hoeing are carried out so as to minimize erosion. Stakes
are then set, following the desired planting distance.
Depending upon the cultivar, the plants are set at 8-10 m
apart to give a population of 100-156 trees per hectare
(see below). 
Holes are dug that are deep and wide enough to accom-
modate the root system (60 x 60 x 60 cm to 90 x 90 x 60 cm)
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
86
in early spring. The holes are filled with compost or farm-
yard manure and top soil (1:1 ratio) before planting. As
most of the wet zone soils are acidic, pH adjustment (to
5.5 - 6.5) is achieved by liming, according to the organic
standards. The places are then occupied by the stakes.
Planting is done in summer.
The plants should be subjected to hardening under full
sunlight before transferring to the field. Before planting,
the leaves of the planting materials are pruned in half to
reduce transpiration. After removal from the container or
polyethylene bag, the plants are set in the prepared holes,
with soil mixture filled and firmed to ensure good contact
with roots. The holes are then filled up with top soil that is
packed firmly around the stem. The plants are then watered
immediately after planting. After establishment, the young
plants are shaded by bamboo sheet, banana leaves, etc. Tree
basins are mulched by dried weed and straw during the next
dry season. The plants are protected from wind by planting
windbreak trees as well as by using stakes for supporting
newly planted trees.
Where avocados are vegetatively propagated by means
of budding or grafting, it is common practice to plant the
tree deeper than normal so that the graft is at or below
ground level. In addition, soil is mounded around the
trunk as the tree grows to assure that the graft union is
below ground. Thus, trees killed to the ground by severe
cold will regenerate from varietal wood rather than from
rootstock.
In areas prone to excess water, they should be planted
on mounds as avocados cannot withstand waterlogging.
Planting usually takes place at the beginning of the
rainy season to minimize the need for frequent watering of
the newly set plants in the field. However, in areas where
there is a uniform distribution of rainfall or where irrigation
water is readily available, planting takes place at any time
of the year. 
Design of New Organic Avocado Orchards
Avocado is planted out to a distance of 6 to 12 meters
depending on the vigour of variety and its growth habit.
For varieties having a spreading type of growth, like
Fuerte, a wider spacing should be given. Most organic
growers generally prefer a wider spacing compared to
their conventional colleagues in order to guarantee good
ventilation and to prevent fungal diseases. Pollinizer
trees are placed so that adequate pollinization is guar-
anteed (e.g. one pollinator for every nine trees). To limit
the erosion on sloping land and to collect water from rain-
fall, organic growers install water traps surrounding the tree
basins. On hills slopes planting is preferred on half-
moon terraces in order to prevent erosion. The shallow,
triangular path connecting to the tree pit is dug with its
open mouth on the reverse slope direction to collect
rainwater.
Avocado in Agroforestry Systems
Some organic growers plant avocado as one of the mixed
crops in agroforestry systems. In such systems, avocado is
a good shade tree for tea and coffee production. In other
cases, organic avocado is inter-cropped with other perennial
crops such as coconut, banana, jackfruit, rambutan,
mangosteen and other fruit trees. Avocado are also planted
along fences. 
Such production systems are of great importance in
organic agriculture because they can be effective in limiting
pests and diseases, thereby enhancing production efficiency.
Another advantage of inter-mixing: avocado trees benefit
indirectly from the cultural practices applied to the main
crop. Therefore, in many cases no special attention is
necessary after planting or throughout the lifetime of
avocado trees. Generally, fertilizer application, weeding
and irrigation regimes for avocado trees are practices to be
varied from orchard to orchard, depending on what main
crop is grown in mixed orchards.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
87
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Conversion of orchards to agroforestry systems
In order to convert monocrop orchards to organic agri-
culture, some organic growers reduced the original high
density of avocado trees (156 trees/ha) by thinning to
allow for the development of other crops like coffee,
durian, mulberry, rambutan, etc. Such avocado orchards
have a density of 50-80 trees/ha. Organic growers prefer
taller and bigger trees as they are more convenient in
mixed gardens.
2.4.3 Soil and Weed Management
The elimination of weed and grass competition can be
important during the first two or three years after planting.
Organic growers perform weed control in young planta-
tions by slashing and using the weeds for mulching. When
weeds are slashed and removed, they are used as a mulch
that helps with moisture retention during the dry season. As
the avocado is a surface feeder, clean weeding (plowing,
disc-harrowing) is not recommended as any damage to the
root system can accelerate Phytopthora infection. Weeding
is usually carried out manually with the use of a scythe or
mechanically with the use of a grasscutter. Once competition
is eliminated, organic mulches can effectively prevent further
problems. Organic materials such as straw, rice husk and
wood chips are commonly used as mulching material.
In bearing orchards, the canopy provides enough shade to
prevent weed growth. In inter-rows up to the periphery, a green
mulch is recommended to control weeds. Peuraria is a suitable
leguminous cover plant for humid tropics. In well-established
agroforestry systems, the shoots of coffee (or other main
crops) overlap and weed control is no longer considered
necessary, both for the host and for intercrop plants.
8 The procedure is described in chapter 2.1.4
2.4.4 Tree Nutrition and Fertilization
Fertilization practices in an organic avocado orchard are gen-
erally more intensive than in a fruit garden or in agroforestry
systems. However, in both cases, fertilization of organic
avocado growths is based on the application of compost (based
on animal manure and/or vegetable materials). Compost is
applied at the onset of the rainy season, before summer leaf
flush. A second application is advisable – if feasible – near the
peak of fruit set. It is usually applied in a ring around the trunk of
the tree or in shallow holes dug beneath the tree canopy. Many
avocado trees in home-gardens and backyards are grown with-
out the benefit of fertilizer. This may be the reason why fruit
yield and quality tend to decline after fruiting for several years.
Avocados need moderate fertilization-levels. Too high or
too low nitrogen-levels reduce yields. The optimum range of
foliar nitrogen level is 1.6-2.0%, optimum phosphorous levels
are 0.07-0.20%, and optimum potassium levels are 0.75-2.0%.
Various micronutrients (Fe, Zn, B) have profound influ-
ences on tree growth, nutrient uptake and yield of avocado.
Compost applications generally provide enough micronutrients.
Deficiencies can be corrected by applying a commercial
product containing these elements in accordance with the
organic certifier8. Avocados benefit from liming: Every 2 to 3
years apply 200 g of dolomite a square meter in the winter.
2.4.5 Water Management and
Irrigation
The avocado can tolerate neither water stress nor excess
moisture, especially when drainage is inadequate. Water
stress causes high flower and fruitlet drop during early
spring, and heavy fruit drop during autumn. Any means of
providing supplementary irrigation to the crop could easily
minimize flower and fruit drop during these dry spells.
Most organic orchards minimize water loss by using cover
plants or mulches.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
88
Soil drainage, soil management, tree density and canopy
size determine irrigation frequencies. Only 50% of the tree’s
requirements should be given in the middle of the cool season
and spring, in order to favor flowering rather than vegetative
growth. When fruit set is completed, irrigation reverts to
normal amounts. High rates are necessary during flowering and
as the fruit approach maturity, and if the weather is too dry.
In drier climates and regions with longer dry periods, irri-
gation at intervals of three to four weeks during the dry months
is beneficial to avocado. To avoid moisture stress during
winter season, mulching with dry grass/dry leaves is desirable.
On level land, sprinkler irrigation can be used. Most efficient
in water use are mikrosprinklers or drip irrigation: mature trees
require eight or more drip emitters around the tree. On steep
hills, the microirrigation systems are the most appropriate.
Flooding is undesirable as it promotes root rot incidence. 
2.4.6 Freeze Protection
Organic growers make maximum use of indirect measures
before heating an orchard, such as: 
< Use of freeze-tolerant races, rootstocks and cultivars;
< Deep planting.
Deep planting and subsequent soil mounding around
the trunk are the best assurances that the avocado will survive
a severe freeze, even if the top is completely killed. When a
severe freeze is being forecast, mound additional soil
around the trunk for extra protection, then water thoroughly
two or three days before the cold weather is expected.
Young trees can be draped (not wrapped) with a blanket
during the freeze event. Any additional heat source under
the tented tree will probably save the leaves as well.
Freeze-damaged wood should be cut out in the spring.
If only limb damage occurs, wait until re-growth commences
and cut back to live tissue. If the tree is killed to the ground,
cut it off at ground level; the regenerated tree will be
naturally multi-trunked or the excess sprouts can be
removed to permit only one to reform the tree.
2.4.7 Pruning
The avocado tree is variable in shape, from tall, upright trees
to widely spreading forms with multiple branches. Trees can
attain heights of 15-18 m. Training and pruning is not an
adopted practice in home gardens. In large-scale cultivations,
however, training and pruning are adopted as trees get closer.
Young avocado trees are normally trained under a modified
leader or open center system. When plant height of newly estab-
lished plants is about 70 cm, the growing tips are pinched off to
allow development of more side shoots to form a round-shaped
tree. When the trees are still young, especially during the first
few years, the plants are trained to a desirable shape by allowing
three well-spaced branches to develop, and eliminating the rest.
Once the trees have attained the desired form, pruning is
confined to the removal of diseased, infested and interlacing
branches and water sprouts. After harvesting, the trees should
be pruned. The upright branches, water sprouts, dead wood,
infected branches, and the branches that are not exposed to the
sun should be pruned off. Sometimes root pruning is carried out
on avocado trees to minimize their nutrient competition with the
main crop (in agroforestry and mixed cropping systems).
In spreading varieties like Fuerte, branches are thinned
and shortened. Heavy pruning has been found to promote
excessive vegetative growth, consequently reducing the
yield. Topping and tree thinning is practiced to rejuvenate a
crowded orchard; it is essential to avoid a loss of bearing
volume in the lower third of the tree.
Generally, in organic avocado orchards, trees are
pruned more frequently and more consequently than in 
conventional orchards due to the importance organic growers
give to good orchard ventilation. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
89
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
2.4.8 Pest and Disease Management
In general, no serious pests and diseases are found in avo-
cado trees in most production regions. In mixed fruit gar-
dens pest attacks are sporadic. In addition, protecting the
trees through spraying organic preparations such as clay
powder or copper in a home garden is not feasible. In agro-
forestry systems and home-gardens, population explosion
of the pest seldom occurs, and elimination is progressively
accomplished through natural enemies. However, in inten-
sive organic orchards, management of pests and diseases
becomes more important. Organic pest and disease man-
agement prioritizes indirect control methods. Direct control
methods are applied with second priority (see chapter
2.1.9).
Pest management
Few insects have been documented on avocados, although
mites sometimes occur on the foliage. None has been
severe enough to warrant control measures. Possums
apparently thrive on mature avocado fruit and will climb
the tree to feed in the absence of fruit on the ground.
Disease Management
A number of diseases appear on avocado production areas
around the world. The most serious is root rot. The follow-
ing measures will help keep an organic avocado orchard
free of this disease:
< Obtain trees only from a reputable nursery manager
who has grown it in a sterile potting mixture; 
< Plant only in deep, well-drained soil, particularly in
high-rainfall coastal areas; 
< Water the tree carefully. Over-watering increases the
risk of root rot; 
< Establish and maintain a permanent organic mulch, 5
cm to 8 cm thick, under the tree canopy and extending
60 cm beyond the canopy. Straw makes a good mulch,
but keep the material 20 cm away from the tree trunk
to avoid bark rots.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
90
Table 11: 
Examples of Avocado Pests and Organic Control Methods
Pests Important to Know Organically control Methods
Ceratitis capitata • Adults oviposit under dry conditions and • Mass trapping (combination of food baits with organic insecticides, such as Spionosad);  
(Mediterranean fruit fly) attack the mature fruits that are about to ripen; • Release of the braconid parasite Diachasmimorpha tryoni and nematodes;
and Dacus dorsalis • Sterile insect technology (STI) is not permitted in organic agriculture. 
(Oriental fruit fly)
Niphonoclea albata, • Attack the trunk, pith and branches by boring • Lime wash and lime sulphur are used as repellents; 
Niphonoclea capitoe, their way through and cutting off the plant’s 
Xylosandrus compactus tissues;
(Borers) 
Asphidiutus destructor • Suck the sap from the leaves, shoots and • Natural enemies provide satisfactory control; 
(Scale Insects); fruits, causing premature falling of the fruits; • In case of high pressure: mineral oil spray; 
(Mealy Bugs)
Heliothrips • Cause fruit blemishes; • Introduction of predatory mites (Euseius hibisci and Anystis agilis) and the minute pirate bug;
haemorrhoidalis • Orchards with ground cover have fewer thrip 
(Greenhouse thrips) problems (natural enemies in the ground litter);
2.4.9 Harvesting and Post Harvest
Handling
Avocado plants raised from seeds start bearing five to six
years after planting. Grafted varieties will produce a few
fruit two years after establishment. Mature trees can
produce two to three or more bushels of avocados with
good management, depending upon variety. Mexican-
race seedlings and varieties typically mature during the
summer; “Lula” and most other hybrids mature in September
or October.
Indicators of Maturity
As the fruit approaches maturity, the percentage of fat in
the pulp increases to reach the standard level characteristic
of each cultivar. Parallely, the percentage of dry matter of
the fruit comes to a constant level. Both can be used as
indicators of maturity. Other indicators are the skin color
and age: Mature fruits of purple varieties change their
color from purple to maroon, whereas fruits of green
varieties become greenish-yellow. Fruits are ready for
harvest when the seed coat colors within the fruit changes
from yellowish white to dark brown. In the case of loose-
seeded varieties, an indication of fruit maturity is the
production of a hollow sound when the fruit is tapped
manually. Some pickers shake the fruits to see whether
the seeds are no longer clinging, looking for signs of
maturity. 
Avocado fruits do not ripen on the tree; the fruits remain
hard as long as they stay on the trees. Mature fruits ripen six
to ten days after harvesting. Some cultivars – especially
Guatemalan x Mexican hybrids – can be stored on the tree
and harvested according to marketing schedules. However,
on-tree storing can lead to biennial bearing and crop failure
in the following year. 
Harvest
Fruits are harvested when they are still immature in
order to prolong their shelf-life during long distance
transportation, often under simple packaging and
handling techniques. The harvesting is achieved manually
by a picker climbing the tree and taking a basket or jute
bag or by using a ladder. Fruits that cannot be reached by
hand are harvested with the use of a long bamboo or alu-
minum pole fitted at one end with a wire hook and an
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
91
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 12: 
Some Guava Diseases and Organic Management
Disease Important to Know Indirect Control Direct Control
Phytophthora • Causes root rot and tree decline; • Use resistant rootstocks such as Morton • Good pruning practice; 
cinnamomi • Yellowing of leaves, sparse foliage, wilting Grandee, Thomas, Barr-Duke, Duke-9; • Cu applications on wounds (Bouille bordelaise  
(Root rot) of leaves and dieback of shoots; • Adequate drainage or avoiding planting 2% and cover with wax); 
• This soil borne disease is commonly found in waterlogged areas; 
in acid soils with poor drainage; • Build up heavy mulch with bagasse, grass, 
straw etc.;
• No plowing underneath the tree canopy;
• Careful irrigation (avoid flood irrigation);
Colletotrichum • Small brown to black spots on the fruit; spots • Adequate drainage; • Spraying with Bordeaux mixture;  
gloeosporioides can enlarge and cause the fruit to crack • Rarely causes significant losses on other 
(Glomerella cingulata across the spot; thick-skinned fruits;
var. minor) • Another strain of the same fungus causes 
(Anthracnose) leaf spot;
• Fuerte cultivar is most susceptible;
Cercospora spot, • Rarely encountered in semiarid regions, • All preventive measures; • Spraying with Bordeaux mixture; 
powdery mildew, but are serious problems in the humid tropics;  
stem-end rot and scab • Affect leaves, young steams, fruit;
net attached to catch the fruits. The fruits are then placed
in bins, pallets, boxes or bamboo baskets lined with
banana leaves for transport to the market. Avocado fruits
on the same tree do not mature at the same time, so
selective harvesting is usually practiced. This requires
going over the tree several times until all the fruits are
harvested.
Avocados give a commercial yield of 7.5 – 15 ha/ha.
The yield ranges from about 100 to 500 fruits per tree
(40-200 kg per tree), depending on cultivar and age
of trees.
Post-Harvest Handling 
Fruits need to be picked carefully. They should be harvested
at the correct stage of maturity, when they are still hard
and have a minimum oil content of 12 %. Hard, mature
fruits are harvested and allowed to ripen during transport
and distribution. Up to 14 days transport time is con-
sidered satisfactory, though unripe avocados can be
stored for up to four weeks if the temperature is kept
between 5.5 and 8°C. 
In the packing houses, fruits are cleaned with roller
brushes. Cleaned fruit pass through graders, where all
diseased, injured and defective fruit are removed and
fruit are separated into size lots for packing. General size
class standards may not be valuable for organic avocado;
this has to be checked with the client. Packing cartons
and labeling must comply with organic standards and
regulations.
Storage temperature for delaying ripening varies with the
cultivar:
< West Indian race: 12.5 °C
< Guatemalan race: 8°C
< Mexican race: 4°C.
A relative humidity of 80-90% is recommended. 
Fruit can be ripened at 25°C or by exposure to
ethylene at 15-17°C for 24 hours and then transported
to the market. Both methods are allowed for organic
marketing.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
92
2.5. Coconut
Coco palms (Cocos nucifera L.) originate from Melanesia.
South east Asia is still an important cultivation region. The
coconut is a monocotyledon plant, and can therefore only
proliferate via seeds. It can produce an inflorescence on
each leaf axil, and can then have either male or female blos-
soms. These are formed on the side, so that generally, the
coco palm is cross-fertilized by a variety of bee species,
other insects and the wind. Coco palms live to an average
age of 60 years.
Every part of the coco palm can be used. The juice from
the inflorescence, which can contain up to 15% sugar, goes to
make palm-wine. Half-ripened nuts (6-7 months old) are
often harvested to be eaten fresh. The coco juice is drunk, and
milk squeezed out of the meat (endosperm). Fully ripened
nuts (after 11-12 months) provide the so-called copra, which
is made from the firm meat of the nut. Copra is high in oil and
protein content (65% oil, 25% protein). Coconut oil is
produced from drying and pressing the copra. Grated
coconut is made from fresh copra. The hard coconut shells are
used to fire kilns used to dry the copra, and to make charcoal.
When they have been finely grated, coconut shells are used as
fillers for objects made of plastic, such as buttons, containers
and other objects. Coconut fibers are used in the upholstery
industry, to make ropes, as mulching material or as a substitute
for peat. The leaves and wood are used as building material
and to make household objects (e.g. brooms) and tools.
2.5.1. Ecological Requirements
The saying “the coco palm loves to stand with its feet in the
water and its head in the sky”, offers a very characteristic
description of the site requirements of coco palms. A
continuous supply of adequate water which can be provid-
ed by regular rainfall of about 2000 mm per annum, or from
ground water (at a depth of 1-3 m). It cannot tolerate
water-logging, though. 
These conditions are generally found in tropical and
subtropical coastal regions with little rainfall. Coco palms
can also grow on deep, water-logging free, alluvial soil,
away from the coast – yet a low chlorine content in the soil
could have negative effects. These conditions should be
well-heeded when choosing a site. 
2.5.2. Soil and Weed Management
Soil
Growth is stimulated by a sufficient supply of chlorine in
the soil. The coco can withstand up to1% salt in the soil.
Coco palms can also grow on deep, water-logging free,
alluvial soil, away from the coast – yet a low chlorine
content in the soil could have negative effects.
Temperature
The coco palm grows best at average temperatures of
around 26-27°C. Because of its temperature requirements it
cannot grow above 750 m, even near to the equator. 
Weed management
The tilling of weeds should be carried out according to
which mixed crop system or agro forestry system is used.
Measures need then to be taken when the following occurs:
< Legumes used for ground-coverage, such as e.g. Pueraria
phaseoloides, Glycine wightii, Arachi Pintoi, Desmodium
ovalifolium, Mimosa invisa, Calopogonium muconoides
or Centrosema pubescens: these plants rapidly develop 
a dense layer of foliage, and can be mulched. The thick
layer of mulching material, along with the shade provided
by the crop itself (especially by pueraria), is an effective
way of controlling weed growth by suppressing it. When
planting Pueraria phaseoloides and Glycine wightii, care
should be taken during the rainy months that the young
plants are not overgrown by weeds. For this reason, a
monthly check and trim is necessary.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
93
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
< If forage is being produced, regular grazing (rotational
grazing) should be interrupted by a hay pasture. Hay
can be used for the dry season; and the crop as well as
the weed growth (among others caused by animal
movement) can be better controlled. In agroforestry
systems, animal husbandry should never be practiced
within the plantation.
< On young coco palm plantations, it may become nec-
essary to remove climbers and epiphytes from the
palms. 
2.5.3. Organic Coconut Palm
Production Systems
Depending on the site, coco palms can be suited to cultivation
on agroforestry systems. As a plant of the upper storey, with
requisite light requirements, the coco palm towers above
such crops as citrus plants, cacao and others.
Organic coconut cultivation does not allow for
monocropping. Existing plantations can be improved by
sowing at least one bottom crop of plants that offer ground
coverage. Legumes can be planted here as green fertilizers.
In multi-level agroforestry systems, cacao, bananas,
pineapples and many other crops can be used. Spices such
as ginger and turmeric also thrive under palms. If animals
are kept, fodder crops should be integrated in a crop rotation
system underneath the coco palms.
If possible, large plants should be used from the
nursery beds when setting up agroforestry systems that
include coco palms. This applies not only to coco palms,
but to all types of palms integrated within agroforestry
systems. Coco palms will grow on any sites that are
suitable for cacao, bananas, citrus (oranges) or papaya.
On citrus plantations, a slightly lower density should
be used (120-150 plants/ha) than for e.g. cacao (150-
180 plants/ha).
A variety of biotopes providing habitats for useful
insects and special bees – which both contribute to the
fertilizing of coco palms – can develop on diversified
plantations. Coco palms cultivated in agroforestry systems
receive significantly more protection against winds in very
windy regions (cyclones).
The quality of the seeds is important to the forthcoming
yield from the palm. For this reason, the seeds should
originate from a healthy, and productive stock plant.
Usually, the seedlings are raised in state tree nurseries. If no
tree nursery can be found that is capable of working under
the restrictions necessary for organic cultivation, then the
seedlings will have to be raised on the site.
Suitable Varieties
Two different main groups are cultivated in the commercial
sector. The tall plants of the Typica group, which generally
need to be cross-fertilized, and dwarf types of the Nana
group, where self-pollination is the norm. Tall varieties
should always be chosen for agroforestry systems, because
these are the only sorts that can reach up to the upper levels
intended for them, and thus fully develop. Dwarf palms
grow very slowly, and are easily overshadowed in the sys-
tem, hindering their full development. In addition, the
Nana variety reacts more sensitively to drought and some
diseases than Typica varieties.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
94
Table 13: 
The tree phases in the life cycle of the coco palm
Life cycle Shade Mixed crops
1st phase: A full frond will only have Cultivation of annual crops   
up to 8th year developed after 8 years; during possible. 
this time, only partial shade is 
available;
2nd phase: Comparatively large amount Cultivation of shade-tolerant   
from 8-25th year of shade varieties.
3rd phase: Shade reaching to the ground High amounts of sunlight allows  
older than diminishes as trees attain cultivation of plants needing lots   
25 years full height of light. 
Propagation and Nursery Management
Stock plants that are suitable seed providers produce 100 nuts
per year, 12-14 syncarpy of differing ages, and up to 180 g
copra per nut. The fully-ripened nuts that are intended to
provide seeds are harvested after 11-12 months. It should be
noted that for the fruit setting at a later date, that the nuts
germinate quicker at the lower end, or in the middle, of the
syncarpy as at the upper end. The nuts should not be allowed
to fall, but should be cut down, and carefully lowered, e.g.
by rope. Following the harvest, the produce should be stored
for a short interval in a covered, well-ventilated place.
Before sowing, the nuts are again sorted; only those
nuts containing water are used. The shell is cut away on the
germinating side of the nut to facilitate germination, then
the nuts are soaked in water for 14 days, before being sown
in loose soil that can drain easily. The nuts are laid in the
soil lengthways with the upper side still visible. They are
sown in nursery beds at a distance of 45 cm. Coconut fibers
are used as mulching material between the rows. The planting
area is nevertheless left uncovered. The nuts can also be sown
in a glasshouse with 95% humidity. On smallholdings, the
nuts are often merely set out in shaded areas, lightly dug in,
and then covered over with organic material.
The nuts begin to germinate after 12 weeks in the
nursery beds. There, they require no additional fertilizer, as
the endosperm provides them with sufficient nutrients.
When the seedlings are planted in beds outside the rainy
season (and not in glasshouses), then the beds need to be
irrigated twice a week with around 5 l water/m2. After the
5th month, the strongest seedlings should be selected and
labeled for transplanting. Around 20-40% of the seedlings
will be unusable. Suitable seedlings germinate earlier, and
have thicker leaf bases. Early leaf-development is a sure
sign of a strong plant. The seedlings are transplanted after
9-10 months, by which time they should have developed
4-5 fully-opened leaves. When the seedlings are removed
from the nursery beds, their roots are shortened, and then
planted again as soon as possible.
The distances between the plants should be between
7.5 x 7.5 m and 6 x 9 m, depending on the cultivation
method used and the other crops being grown, or similar
distances resulting in an average density of 150-180
trees/ha. The seedlings are planted in a hollow 60-75 cm
below the surface that is gradually filled with the coco
palm’s growth, while the lateral roots are at a greater depth.
This means that the palms are less susceptible to drought
periods. This method should not be used when the ground
water is relatively high. The young seedlings also need to be
protected from bites when animals are being raised.
2.5.4. Soil Nutrition and Organic
Fertilization
The following amounts of nutrient extraction pertain to
cultivation on conventional plantations:
If the entire fruit – including fruit shell, husk,
endosperm and the leaves – are to be used, then the values
for nutrient extraction per hectare cultivated are much higher
(232 kg N; 251 kg K; 51 kg Mg; 215 kg Cl).
Fertilization
The level of nutrient extraction on a coco palms/mixed crop
system can be balanced by encouraging the decomposition
of organic material that is made available, e.g. through
mulching material, green fertilizer and tree trimming. A
dense crop of legumes such as Glyricidia sepium, Pueraria
phaseoloides, Calopogonium mucunoides, Centrosema
pubescens, Arachi pintoi, Glycine wightii, Desmodium
ovalifolium or use of another plants providing ground
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
95
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 14: 
Average nutrient extraction 
of coco palms (kg/ha)
N[kg] P [kg] K [kg] Ca [kg] Mg [kg]
NUTRIENT EXTRACTION 67.8 12 83.6 16.6 23.2
coverage as bottom crops, and which are regularly supplied
with mulching material, will provide a sufficient supply of
nitrogen for the plants.
It is important to take care that all harvest and processing
residues, such as coco fibers and press-cakes from the oil-
extraction process, are returned to the plantation. This also applies
to the potassium-rich ash resulting from burning the coco husks.
If insufficient organic material is produced on the
plantation, the deficit can be balanced by regularly adding
compost. The compost should be enriched with any wood
ashes (or coco husk ashes) that are available. 
The compost is spread out in a circle 3-5 m underneath
the palms, and preferably covered over with coco shell
mulching material. The latter may be especially necessary
in systems lacking enough additional vegetation.
A deficiency in potash will result in a large reduction of
yield for coco palms. The vast majority of the potassium is
thereby contained in the fruit water of the coconuts. On
cultivation systems which include cacao, returning the
cacao shells to the site will supply sufficient potassium to
balance out the extraction. The continual pruning of crops
on diversified agroforestry systems provides an important
source of nutrients (e.g. of potassium). 
When providing a nutrient supply to coco palms, it should
be noted that it can take up to 36 months before inflorescence
begins. This means that measures to supply nutrients, or to
counteract deficits or other morphological disturbances, will
take 3 years before they have an effect on production. 
Conditions for the nutrient availability
Due to their symbiosis with endomycorrhizae fungi
(phosphate supply), and their tolerance of soil salts (which
are often harmful to the other crops), coco palms, as well as
other varieties of palm, have a beneficial effect on the
growth of the other crops in an agroforestry system.
2.5.5. Pest and Disease Management
In a balanced cultivation system, which includes middle
and bottom crops, as well as nitrogen-fixing green manuring
plants (legumes), diseases and pests requiring some form of
counter-measures will rarely occur – especially when
enough birds are present on the plantation. These are often
present in multi-level cultivation systems.
Most of the problems concerning disease and pests have the
following causes:
< Cultivation in a monoculture, or with too few different
varieties.
< Too little distance between species that grow to the
same height; failure to trim agroforestry systems.
< Degenerated or poor soil, lack of organic material.
< Unsuitable sites (water-logging, too dry, soil not deep
enough for roots).
In most cases, the most effective cure is to alter the
entire system of cultivation. 
Diseases
If a system is not yet in a state of ecological balance, heart
rot, caused by Phytophthora palmivora, can occur in all of
the producing regions – where it is widely spread. In cases
of heavy infestation by Phytophtora palmivora, harvest-
losses can be lessened by using Bordeaux mixture, or any
other copper-rich spraying preparations, that are permitted
in organic farming systems. These measures should only be
undertaken in cases of emergency. In less harmful cases,
removing any infested plants from the plantation will result
in the infection being limited.
Considerable damage can be caused in regions with
large coco palm monocultures by the mycoplasmose, a
fungi that grows in cuts in the fronds. The disease can be
brought under control by removing infested plant parts or
whole palms. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
96
Pests
Amongst the young trees in tree nurseries, an attack of
termites may occur. The termites can be effectively com-
bated by pouring a thin layer of sand from the soil over
the exposed parts of the buried nuts. Young coco palms
are also susceptible to the rhinoceros beetle and coconut
caterpillars. Pheromone traps have been successfully
utilized in Sri Lanka against the rhinoceros beetle. In
emergency cases, butterfly caterpillars can be regulated
with Bazillus thuringiensis.
Coconut red weevil and Rhinocerus beetle only usually
damage young palms, yet may also, in exceptional cases,
cause damage to mature crops. In acute cases, they can be
combated by closing the larvae tunnels, and with
pheromone traps.
The trunks of young seedlings are often protected
against pests by painting them with tar. This is not permitted
on organic plantations, and the black covering also causes
the plants to heat up unnecessarily. An alternative is to
paint the trees with a mixture of sulphur, soil and lime,
(1 : 2 : 1) added together with water to make a thick paste.
If necessary, the paste may need to be renewed, as rain
will wash it off.
In coco palm monocultures, rodents, and especially
rats, can develop into a serious epidemic that is difficult
to bring under control again. Metal plates fixed to the
trunks will effectively stop them from climbing up the
trees, though.
It was observed that interplanting coconut with citrus,
mango, cashew, cloves etc. encourages the colonization of
coconut groves by the weaver ant, Oecophylla longinoda,
which is the most important enemy of the coconut bug,
Pseudotheraptus wayi. Other fruit trees are suitable hosts
for bugs and good nesting sites for the ants. The spread of
the predatory weaver ant can be enhanced by making arti-
ficial bridges between trees that are already colonized by
the ant and those trees that are to be protected from the
coconut bug. Farmers can use any material as bridge (e.g.
plastic or steel wires).
This method has received widespread acceptance in
Tanzania, given that it is simple to implement, inexpensive
and utilizes materials available locally.
2.5.6. Harvesting and Post Harvest
Handling
The nuts ripen during the entire year. As a rule, a harvest is
carried out every 1-2 months, when the ripened coconuts
are harvested directly from the tree – farmers should not
wait until the nuts fall from the tree. The nuts are fully
ripened when the coconut water can be clearly heard sloshing
against the inside when they are shaken. Harvesting too
early can unfavorably affect the quality of the copra.
When the coco fibers are to be used to make ropes, the
nuts should be harvested before they are fully ripened
(about 12 months old nuts), because otherwise the fibers
will be brittle. They should be harvested at an age of around
10-11 months.
An average harvest yields around 40-80 nuts per palm
and year.
Harvesting Methods:
In principle, there are three different possibilities:
1. The palms can be scaled, and the coconuts knocked
down. The advantage here is that it is easier to tell
which nuts are ripe. The palm crown can also 
simultaneously be trimmed (removing dead leaves).
2. The coconuts are cut down with a knife attached to 
a long bamboo pole (e.g. in Sri Lanka). This method
can be used for palms up to about 8 m in height, and 
is the most usual method of harvesting.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
97
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
3. The coconuts are broken off by trained apes (e.g. in
Malaysia and Thailand).
Post Harvest Treatment
As a rule, the coconuts are separated from the fibrous husks
on the plantation and sold as whole nuts (“balls”).
Occasionally, the nuts are halved on the plantation, and
dried in the sun. In the majority of cases, though, the
coconuts are processed further industrially.
2.6. Bananas
Economically, the most important type of tropical fruit is
the banana (Musa x paradisiaca L.). Marketing of bananas
was begun largely by multinational companies, and has
altered in this respect little to this day. These companies
often maintain a production chain stretching from their
own plantations to ripening stations at the final ports of
destination. Certain types of banana, but especially the
plantain, form part of the staple diet in many tropical
countries.
Bananas grown organically have only appeared in
recent years, and are invariably intended for shipment to the
European markets.
2.6.1. Botany
The banana belongs to the Musaceae family and includes
the genera Musa and   Ensete. The economically important
banana sorts belong to the Eumusa section. The name Musa
x paradisiaca is generally retained for the entire group of
fruit and  cooking bananas, because many of the varieties
are of a hybrid nature.
Edible bananas contain no seeds. Reproduction is
carried out via its subterranean rhizome, the shoots of
which regularly form fruitful buds. The banana plant pos-
sesses a so-called pseudo-stem, which is created by the
leaf sheathes. Inflorescence usually begins around 7-9
months after planting, depending on climatic conditions
and type of soil. Parthenokarpy (unfertilized) fruits,
standing together in groups (clusters), develop from the
female blossoms. Seed formation is still visible in the fruit
as blackened bands. The development period of the fruit
can last up to ca. 3-4 months, depending on weather
conditions. After the bunch has been fully formed, the
parent plant dies off.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
98
2.6.2. Varieties and Countries of
Origin
As a tropical culture, the banana places heavy demands on
temperature (opt. 25°C ) and rainfall (opt. 1500-4000 mm).
Nevertheless, bananas are also grown in subtropical areas
such as South Africa, Lebanon, Israel and on the Canary
Islands, although additional irrigation is generally necessary
in these regions. In practical terms, only cold-resistant dwarf
bananas (“Dwarf Cavendish”) are suitable for these regions.
Varieties of the Cavendish group currently dominate in
commercial plantations, after the taller “Gros Michel”
bananas were decimated by the Panama disease. In addition
to the extensively grown commercial varieties, a large
number of local varieties are found in the tropical regions
world-wide. These can be utilized in various ways to
accommodate different sites and production systems, and
also combined with one another.
9 LÜDDERS, P. (1989) in: Manual about Agriculture and Nutrition in
Developing Countries, Volume 4, Ulmer.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
99
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Fruits and flower of a banana tree.
Table 15: 
Overview of the Most Important Varieties and
Their Characteristics9
Varieties Characteristics and Genome
“Sucrier” Around 60 varieties, mostly in SEA, resistant against Panama 
disease, low yield. Genome: AA
”Ney Poovan” From South India, varieties barely described, highly resistant against 
Panama and Sigatoka diseases. Genome: AB
”Gros Michel” Strong growth, fruitful, susceptible to Panama disease. Genome: AB
”Robusta” Not as susceptible to Panama disease and wind break as 
and ”Lacatan” ”Gros Michel”. Genome: AB
”Dwarf Cavendish” Especially suited to unfavorable climatic conditions, resistant against 
Panama disease, but very susceptible to the Sigatoka disease, 
widely distributed, especially in Australia, South Africa, Israel 
and the Canary Islands, distributed world-wide
“Mysore” Resistant against Panama disease and banana root borer, grown 
in India, strong growth. Genome: AAB
”Silk”, Grows fairly strong, widely distributed, resistant against Sigatoka 
disease, but not against Panama disease. Genome: AAB
”Pome” Strong growth, medium harvest, resistant against Panama 
and Sigatoka diseases, distributed throughout southern India, 
Hawaii and E. Australia. Genome: AAB
“Bluggoe” Strong growth, resistant against Panama and Sigatoka diseases, 
only a few clusters with large, green fruits, high starch plantain. 
Genome: ABB
“Pisank awak” Very strong growth, resistant against Sigatoka disease, different 
mutations, red flesh, contains seeds after fertilization, grown 
in Thailand. Genome: ABB
”Bodles Altafor” Fruitful, resistant to diseases, but not tested sufficiently yet, cross 
between ”Gros Michel” and ”Pisang lilin” (AA\ clone). 
Genome: AAAA
”I.C.2” Found in West India, Honduras and the Pacific region, cross between 
”Gros Michel” and M. acuminata, resistant against Sigatka disease, 
less resistant against Panama disease. Genome: AAAA
”Klue teparod” Only natural tetraploide variety, fruit is matt gray, mushy, stringy, 
sweet plantain in Thailand and Burma, a robust and disease-resistant 
variety. Genome: ABBB
There are many other local varieties, as well as common
commercial varieties grown under different local names.
Organically produced bananas have become more
widespread in the past few years. Most of the bananas
intended for the European market are grown in the Canary
Islands, as well as from Ecuador, the Dominican Republic,
Costa Rica, Uganda and Israel. Smaller organic projects
also exist serving regional markets (e.g. Bolivia). 
2.6.3 Uses and Contents
The main form of the common edible banana is as fresh
fruit; only a small proportion enter the market in dried
form. In Europe and North America, the common edible
banana, produced and marketed by a handful of major
companies, is most widespread. Smallholders produce
mainly for themselves and for regional markets, where the
banana represents an important part of the daily diet.
Plantains play a large role here, and a wide variety are
thereby cultivated.
The following represents nutritional values of the
common eating banana10
10 REHM, S. und ESPIG, G. (1976): Crops in tropical and subtropical
regions, Ulmer Taschenbuch.
Flour is produced from both plantains and eating
bananas in many regions, which can then be used in soups,
baking or as a drink. The banana can also be used to make
vinegar and to brew alcoholic beverages. The stamina
flowers can be used as a vegetable, after briefly heating
them in salty water (to remove the bitterness). Bananas can
also be used as a starch-rich animal feed (pig farming).
The fresh leaves are high in protein content, and are
preferred for their taste by cattle and chickens. The leaves
are also commonly used as packing material and for
roofing. Along with the pseudo-stem they offer excellent
mulching material.
2.6.4. Site Requirements
The ancestors of our commercial bananas originated from
the Malaysian peninsula, New Guinea and South-East Asia.
They grow in alluvial and volcanic soils, as well as in river
deltas and forest perimeters, where the soil is rich in organic
material. They are part of both young and old secondary
forest formations, where they are located either at the top
or the middle of the forest, according to variety and devel-
opment stage. This means that they are more or less adaptable
to shade, according to variety. In comparison with eating
bananas, plantains require more soil fertility. They grow in
the upper layers of natural vegetation, therefore requiring
more light, and cannot tolerate extended periods of shadow.
Commercially used varieties cannot endure stagnant water
conditions, and are susceptible to wind break (especially
when not grown in agroforestry system).
2.6.5 Seeds and Seedlings
Bananas are reproduced vegetatively. In accordance with
availability, required amounts and transport possibilities,
the following are suitable:
< Whole rhizomes
< Rhizome pieces
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
100
Table 16: 
Nutritional value of bananas per 100g fresh
weight of the edible parts
Contents Amount 
water 75 g
Edible carbohydrates 20 g
Raw fat 0,3 g
Raw fibers 0,3 g
Vitamin A 400 I.E.
Vitamin C 10 mg
Energy 460 kJ
Reduction before eating 33%
< Shoots with inflorescence in the pseudo-stem
< Shoots lacking inflorescence in the pseudo-stem.
Using whole rhizomes is laborious. It requires a large
amount of starting material and generates high transport
costs. Rhizome pieces and shoots lacking inflorescence in
the pseudo-stem are less expensive.
It is very important that the shoots are undamaged, and
originate from nematode-free plantations. Prior to planting,
the roots and any damaged spots should be removed with a
sharp knife. 
2.6.6. Methods of Planting
The distances between plants is determined by the variety,
soil conditions and the type of planting system. Slow growing
plants, such as the Dwarf Cavendish, can be planted in a
density of 2500 plants/ha. The more robust Giant Cavendish,
Robusta or other strongly developing varieties are set at
600-1200 plants/ha. Experiences culled in the different
regions have led to a variety of recommendations regarding
size and depth of hole required, which should be heeded. It is
recommendable to cover the planted rhizome with mulching.
The most suitable planting period is towards the end of
the dry season, or at the beginning of the rainy season, and
is also dependent upon any accompanying crops. Several
seeds from different local shrubs and trees should be
dropped into each plant hole. Cuttings from varieties which
reproduce vegetative can also be used (Morbus albus,
Malvaviscus arboreus, Gliricidia sepium, etc.).
In regions of intensive banana production, it is important
to ensure that no undesirable pesticide-drift from conven-
tional neighboring plantations occurs. This is especially
the case when aero spraying takes place. Under these
circumstances, it is necessary to plant high, growing hedges
of sufficient depth. 
2.6.7. Diversification Strategies
On conventional plantations, bananas are grown over
large areas as part of a monoculture. A wide variety of
combination possibilities is available for organic cultivation,
especially in connection with permanent crops and
agroforestry systems. 
The following recommendations pertain to the
common eating banana. Due to their high demands on
soil (compare chapter 2.6.4.), an intensive accompanying
vegetation is required. With suff icient foresight and
planning, this can later be used to replace the bananas.
Due to the fact that specif ic plantation systems with
the suitable variety of plant need to be established
for each region, site, and even for individual plots, it
is only possible to provide an overview of the basic
guidelines here.
In principle, bananas can be combined with practically
any type of cultivated or wild plant which has similar
eco-physiological requirements. Young banana plants are
excellent “wet nurses” for other crops and forest plants,
which can be planted very close to the bananas. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
101
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Banana agroforestry.
Three examples:
If no other crops are to be integrated into the system,
then it is sufficient to combine the bananas with forest trees
and native fruit trees.
If other crops are to be introduced onto an existing
monoculture plantation, then especially the fruit carrying
pseudo-stems will need to be thinned out.
Depending upon which plantation system is used,
the planting times for the different crops need to be co-
coordinated, to ensure each receives its optimum location.
Each crop can thereby be planted as if in a one-crop system.
The types of maintenance employed are most important in
this approach. Native species with varying heights, as well
as trees that can withstand frequent cutting – such as Inga
ssp., Erytrina ssp. etc, depending on the site – which have
been tested in standard agroforestry systems, should be
used as forest trees. A wide variety of species and high
density of plants should be strived for. The high plant density
can be useful for example in suppressing the growth of other
vegetation (like grasses etc.). It also provides sufficient
mulching material, which needs to be continually cut and
added to the soil. Satisfactory banana production can only be
achieved with a large amount of organic material produced
on the plantation itself (compare chapter 2.6.5.).
2.6.8. Nutrients and Organic
Fertilization Management 
Nutrient Requirements
On conventional plantations in prime locations, bananas
are planted over many years as monocultures. This results
in a continual loss of organic material, and to a general
degeneration of the soil, which then needs to be compensated
for with a high input of mineral fertilizers.
Understandably, the amounts of nutrients recommended
vary quite strongly, depending on which literature one con-
sults. The following refer to individual plant parts:
11 JAKOB, A., u. UEXKÜLL, H.V. (1963): Fertilizer Use. Nutrition
and Manuring of Tropical Crops. 3. Aufl. Verlagsgesellschaft für
Ackerbau, Hannover.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
102
1
1. year 2. year 3. year 5.-10. year from 11. year
Maize
Papaya Papaya
Banana Banana Banana Banana
Cocoa Cocoa Cocoa Cocoa Cocoa
Forest trees Forest trees Forest trees Forest trees Forest trees
2
1. year 2. year 3. year 5.-10. year from 11. year
Hibiscus
Banana Banana Banana Banana
Coffee Coffee Coffee Coffee Coffee
Forest trees Forest trees Forest trees Forest trees Forest trees
3
1. year 2. year 3. year 5. year 6.-10. year from 11. year
Maize/
Manioc
Pineapple Pineapple Pineapple Pineapple
Banana Banana Banana Bananas Bananas
Forest trees Forest trees Forest trees Forest trees Forest trees Forest trees
Table 17: 
The “nutrient depletion” resulting for each 
1000 kg bananas11 (in kg)
N [kg] P [kg] K [kg] Ca [kg] Mg [kg]
2 0,3 5 0,4 0,5
Organic Fertilization Strategies
These values for nutrient depletion and fertilization are
given from a viewpoint of conventional plantation systems.
They are not capable of solving the problems of decreasing
yield and soil fertility. The majority of banana varieties
cultivated for export purposes require a high soil quality.
In natural forest ecosystems, they appear towards the
beginning of the new growth, and must be replaced by
other species about every 10-15 years. If this is not carried
out on the plantation, then sooner or later a crisis will occur,
which can only be solved in the short term by applying
fertilizers and pesticides. 
Regular application of organic material gained from
cutting work helps to maintain a layer of humus and
activity in the soil. This includes adding dead leaves and
pseudo-stems grown on the plantation as mulching
material. It is important that the material is spread
evenly throughout the entire plantation. Organic manure
should only be seen as an additional fertilizer, and not as
the main source of nutrients for the bananas. These
measures will suffice to maintain the fertility of the soil
on sites suited to growing bananas, despite continual
harvests. 
12 BOUFFIL, in Franke, G. (1984): Nutzpflanzen der Tropen und
Subtropen, Hirzel Verlag Leipzig.
2.6.9. Biological Methods of Plant
Protection
Diseases
The most important diseases in conventional banana
plantations are:
< Panama disease (Fusarium oxisporum f. sp. Cubense)
< Black and yellow Sigatoka disease (Mycosphaerella
musicola, Mycospheerella fijiensis)
< Root rot (Poria sp., Pytium sp., Armillaria mellea,
Rhizoctonia solani)
< Bacterial rot (Pseudomonas solanacearum)
< Rhizome rot (Erwinia carotovora)
< Virus diseases (Mosaic virus, banana bunchy top
virus, infectious chlorosis etc.)
The above mentioned diseases occur mainly in conven-
tional plantation systems, and are combated by using
resistant varieties (Cavendish instead of Gros Michel), or
in conventional farms by spraying with mineral oil and
fungicide by airplane. In organic plantation systems these
phytosanitary problems must be prevented by cultivation
methods and also the use of resistant plants (compare
chapter 2.6.7.).
Pests 
The most important pests also occur mainly on monoculture
plantations, these are:
< Root nematodes
< Banana root borer (Cosmopolites sordidus)
The exclusive use of healthy seeds, and application of
appropriate measures, offer the most effective preventative
and thus alternative methods of controlling insects and
nematodes (compare chapter 2.6.7.). The application of
waste from extensive shrimp farms in Ecuador (shrimp
shells) has shown good results against nematodes beside
being a good organic fertilizer.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
103
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 18: 
Required amounts of nutrients (in kg/ha) for a
harvest of 1000 kg/ha of bananas (adjusted acc. to)12
Plant part N [kg] P [kg] K [kg] Ca [kg]
Pseudo-stem 0,96 0,16 2,5 0,56
Leaves 6,38 0,6 10,5 3,43
bunch 2,13 0,26 4,53 0,1
Total 9,46 1,03 17,6 4,2
In conventional plantations, the bunches are often
protected by covering them with polyethylene sacks. When
protective bags are used in organic systems, the following
must be heeded:
< That the insides are pesticide-free (quite normal on
conventional plantations), and 
< That the plastic coverings are bio-degradable.
2.6.10. Monitoring and Maintenance
Crop Establishment
Around 4-6 months after the bananas and additional crops
have been planted, a primary selective weed regulation
should be performed. The actual time depends largely on the
type of additional crops (annual crops, annual or biannual
under seeds), and also from the preliminary condition of
the plot. Strong growths of Graminea and Cyperacea will
occur in soils already degraded. These should be pulled up,
and exchanged for seeds of the Canavalis ensiformis,
Crotalaria ssp. or other similar under seeds from non-
creeping plants. Foliage regulation consists in the main of
cutting back the blossoms and removing grasses, as
mentioned above, which are both then left on the surface as
mulching material. 
Surplus shoots need to be regularly cut away from the
planted bananas. Three shoots should be left, which can
then grow until they are ripe. Thereafter, only one shoot is
left remaining, so that after one year three times the density
has been achieved, which is then maintained.
The accompanying vegetation (bushes and trees which
can be cut) is cut back, and the resulting material chopped
up and spread around the surface as mulching material.
This should be carried out once or twice a year, according to
growth. This cutting regulation results in a continual supply of
organic material in varying consistency, and also increases
the amount of available light, thus stimulating new growth. 
Trees which cast no foliage (e.g.. Inga ssp, Glyricidia
sepium, Leucaena leucocephala), should be cut back at the
banana plant’s height once a year, so that around 15% of
their leaves remain. Depending on which variety of bananas
have been planted, more or less shade can then be controlled.
The tall varieties such as Red, Green Red (manzano,
manzano rojo) and Giant Cavendish belong to those that
can cope with a lot of shade, whereas Dwarf Cavendish
requires less.
Crop Production 
After around one to two years, usually no weeding activ-
ities are necessary, and pruning remains as the principal
task. In addition to regularly removing the shoots, the
inactive leaves should also be cut away (these usually
hang bent downwards). In the course of time, the planta-
tion will tend to “wander”, in that the original gaps
between the plants change. This means that it may be
necessary to remove plants that now stand too close to
one another. Depending on the initial situation at the site
and the type of plantation, the production of bananas is
lessened by the gradual coverage of accompanying vege-
tation. If the plantation has been established with
additional economically interesting crops, then these can
continue to be harvested. If there is no relevant alternative
to the banana production, then the plantation can be
cleared, and newly planted. In the latter case, the farmer
now has soil with an improved fertility.
2.6.11. Harvesting and Post- Harvest
Treatment
Harvesting
Harvesting the banana bunches is usually spread evenly
throughout the whole year. A slowing down in pro-
duction, or even cessation, only generally occurs at
sites which experience either a noticeable drop in
temperature during the winter months, or distinctive
dry periods. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
104
Whilst still green, the fruits have a distinctly edged
appearance, which gradually becomes almost round as
they ripen. The fruits of a bunch do not ripen at the same
pace. If some fruits have begun to turn yellow on the
plant, then it is already too late to transport them any great
distance, as they quickly become too soft and burst. The
bananas must therefore be harvested while still green. The
optimal cutting stage is established by the diameter of
individual fruits. To simplify the harvest, the bushes are
marked with different colored bands as the fruits appear.
The workers will then only cut bananas of a particular
color, which are now ripe enough. Terms which characterize
the thickness of the fruit, such as “three-quarters”, “light
full three-quarters”, “full three quarters” and “full”,
are also used. The duration of a proposed transport
determines in which stage a fruit destined for export is
judged to be ripe.
In order to achieve a uniform ripeness during shipping,
the maturity stage of an entire bunch should be as consistent
as possible. Harvests are therefore usually carried out at
one to two week intervals.
The bunches are harvested by cutting them away from
the plant just above where the fruit begins. The tall varieties
must also be freed of their pseudo-stems, which are bent
back and cut off, in order for the bunches to become visible.
Thereby, it is very important that the bunches do not fall, or
are otherwise bumped during shipping, as this causes them
to blacken and rot.
It is advisable to leave behind a ca. 2 m high stub
(depending on the variety) of the pseudo-stem, because
nutrients and water are still transported to the remaining
shoots for several weeks, and thereby encouraged in their
development. The cut away part of the pseudo-stem is lain
with the cut side facing downwards directly next to the
neighboring trees. This type of mulching prevents a
damaging anaerobe oxidation by butyric acid bacteria
inside the stalk, and encourages an intensive stimulation
of the soil flora. The remains of the stalk are then cut off at
the base during the next bout of maintenance work, and also
lain on the ground. The large surface of the banana leaves
should be trimmed away along the petiole and chopped up
so that the secondary vegetation be allowed to develop. 
Preparation, Transport and Storage
On large plantations, the harvested clusters are transported
to distant packaging sites by fastening them down with
ropes, or hanging them from the lorries to avoid bruising.
Once there, the clusters are prepared by cutting away any
badly formed fruits at their tops and base. Any leaking milk
which drops onto the fruit will cause it to blacken during
ripening and sale will be impossible. This can be avoided
when the individual, separated bunches are washed in cold
water to then can be drained.
Conventionally, the fruit is washed with disinfectant (Na-
Bisulfite, Na-Hypochlorite) and/or treated in a fungicide bath.
The use of fungicides is out of the question on organic
plantations. Either alum salt (potassium alum) or extracts
from lemons or orange pips (kernels) can be used to
disinfect. So called crown rot (Colletotrichum musae)
can be prevented by wetting the cut with vinegar. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
105
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Preparation of the harvested banans for transportation 
and storage.
The cleansing water that collects at preparation sites
contains many organic compounds, and must therefore be
biologically treated before allowing it to flow into a
drainage ditch. Organic material that collects during prepa-
ration (e.g. unusable, damaged fruits) should be composted
and returned to the soil.
The ratio of harvested to exportable fruits is between
1 : 1 and 1 : 1.7 , whereby the latter is more usual.
The individual bunches are packaged in cartons of 12 kg
or 20 kg (Costa Rica), which are lined with polyethylene
foil. Cooling equipment must then be used to delay the
ripening process during shipping. Optimum temperatures
are dependant on the variety, and vary between 12-15°C. At
too low temperatures, frost damage can occur, such as lack
of ripening, production of tannins, discoloring of the skins,
inhibition of starch transformation as well as an increased
production of ascorbic acid. An additional delay in the
ripening process can be achieved by increasing the CO2
content and reducing the O2 content of the storage room
atmosphere during shipping. 
Controlled Ripening
Special warehouses must be available at the destination
port (ripening plant) in order to subject the fruits to a con-
trolled ripening process. This takes place at about  20°C
and at an atmospheric concentration of 0,1% ethylene. The
use of ethylene to accelerate the ripening process, as well as
the use of kalinite to delay the ripening of bananas, is
allowed in the EEC-regulation for organic agriculture
(EEC) 2092/91.
2.6.12. Product Specifications and
Quality Standards
Handling
The banana is the most commonly cultivated tropical fruit.
It is used in many areas, in the form of plantains, horse
bananas, common eating bananas and fibrous bananas.
They can be turned into dried products, such as flour,
starch, powder, flakes, chips, and dried fruit, as well as
pulp, concentrate, juice and dried fruit or wine, spirits and
liquor. A whole range of eating banana varieties in particular
are exported fresh.
It is recommendable to harvest bananas for the export
market whilst they are still green. After harvesting, the 30-
45 kg heavy clusters are washed, whereby thyme extract can be
added to the water to aid disinfecting. After drying, the bundles
(“bunches”) are separated, sorted, classified, packed in standard
cartons of 12 kg or 18 kg and placed into cold storage.
The EU quality standards for Bananas  are shown in the
Annex.
Packaging and Storage
Packaging
The regulations concerning carton labeling were dealt with
in section VI of the “EU quality standards for bananas”.
Storage
Unripe, original  bananas can be shipped within 10-14 days
by boat at 14-15°C and 90-95% relative humidity. The final
ripening process takes place in special banana ripening
plants, at temperatures from 14.5-18 °C and lasts 4-8 days.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
106
Organic banana plantation.
Bananas cannot be stored for long. They can be stored
for up to 10 days at 13-15°C and 90% relative humidity, just
prior to being ripe enough to eat.
Annex: Quality Requirements
The ‘EU quality standard for bananas’ clearly defines the
quality requirements placed upon trade with fresh bananas.
The regulations must be strictly adhered to until the fruit
reaches the ripening plants.
The following is an excerpt from the “EU quality
standard for bananas”:
(I) DEFINITION
The standards apply to bananas of the following listed
varieties of the genus Musa (AAA) ssp., subgroups
Cavendish and Gros Michel, to be transported in a fresh
state to consumers. Flour bananas and Fig bananas, as well
as bananas intended for industrial processing are not
included.
(II) QUALITY CHARACTERISTICS REGULATIONS
The standard regulates the quality characteristics that
green, unripe bananas must exhibit after packing and
processing.
a. Minimum Characteristics
Subject to the pertinent regulations and tolerances for each
class, the bananas in all quality classes must be configured
as follows:
< green, unripe
< whole, firm
< clean, practically free of visible foreign matter
< practically free of pests and the damage caused by
them with a unbroken, intact stalk which is not dried
out and is free of fungus
< the fruit must not be misshapen, and not abnormally
bent
- free of bruising and frost damage
- free of strange smells and/or taste
Furthermore, the bunches or clusters must also have:
< a sufficient, healthy length of normally-colored 
coronet, free of fungus
< a clean cut of the coronet, without evidence of nicks 
or tearing 
The development and ripeness of the fruit must be so that
they:
- can withstand handling and transporting
- are in a satisfactory condition when they arrive 
at the port, and will achieve a reasonable state of 
ripeness after ripening has taken place.
b. Classifications
< Class Extra 
Bananas in this class must be of the highest quality.
They must possess the characteristics typical of their
variety and/or trading type. 
The fruits must be unblemished, with the exception
of very light surface flaws that cover less than 1 cm2 of
the fruit’s surface, and providing this does not detract
from the fruit’s general appearance, quality, the time it
will keep and the presentation of the bunch or cluster in
its packaging. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
107
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Group Subgroup Main variety
AAA Cavendish Petite naine (Dwarf Cavendish)
Grande naine (Giant Cavendish)
Lacatan
Poyo (Robusta)
Williams
Americani
Valéry
Arvis
Gros Michel Gros Michel
Highgate
< Class 1
Bananas in this class must be of good quality. They
must possess the characteristics typical of their variety
and/or trading type. The following blemishes are per-
missible, providing they do not detract from the fruit’s
general appearance, quality, the time it will keep and the
presentation of the bunch or cluster in its packaging:
- Slightly misshapen
- Light flaws in the skin caused by friction or by 
other means, providing the area does not exceed 
2 cm2 of the total surface area of the fruit. 
< Class 2
This class is composed of those bananas that cannot be
placed in the upper classes, yet fulfill the definitions of
minimum requirements. The following faults are allowed,
providing the bananas retain their essential characteristics
in terms of quality, preserve ability and presentation:
- Shape defects,
- Skin flaws, caused by scratches, friction or other 
means, providing the less than 4 cm2 of the total 
surface is affected. 
The flaws are not permitted to affect the fruit’s pulp.
(III) SIZE CLASSIFICATION REGULATIONS
Size classification is performed according to:
< The length of the fruit in cm measured along the outer
curve from the stem to the blossom end.
< The thickness in mm, measured as the diameter of the
middle, cutting across its longitudinal axis.
Size classification of a reference fruit is carried out by
measuring the length and thickness 
- Of the outer, middle fruit of a bunch
- Of the first fruit of a outer row of a cluster, next 
to the cut that separated the bunch.
The length must be at least 14 cm and the thickness at
least 27 mm.
Deviations to the previous paragraph are allowed in the
following regions: Madeira, Azores, Algarve, Crete and
Laconia, where bananas measuring less than 14 cm may
still be marketed within the union, providing they are
classified as class II fruits.
(V) PRESENTATION REGULATIONS
a. Uniformity
The contents of a carton must be uniform, and may only
contain bananas of identical origin, variety and/or trade
type, and quality.
The visible part of the carton must be representative of
the entire contents.
b. Packaging
The bananas must be packed in a way that ensures sufficient
protection
Packing material used inside the carton must be new,
clean, and so shaped that it cannot cause any damage to
either the inside or outside of the fruit. The usage of
materials such as papers and stickers with company details
on them is permitted providing the no toxic inks, dyes or
glues have been used. 
The packaging must be free of all other materials.
c. Presentation
Presentation is in bunches comprising at least 4 fruits. 
Clusters with a maximum of two fruits missing are
permitted when the stalks have been cleanly cut off, and not
torn, leaving the other fruits unharmed.
A maximum of one cluster with three fingers is permitted
in each row, providing it conforms to the characteristics of
the other fruits in the carton.
(VI) REGULATIONS OF CARTON LABELING
Each carton must display the following details in unbroken,
legible, permanent letters visible from the outside:
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
108
a. Identification
Name and address of the packer
b. Type of Product
“Bananas”, when the contents are not visible
Name of the variety 
c. Origin of Product
Country of origin, and optionally, national, regional or local
description
d. Commercial Characteristics
< Class
< Net weight
< Size, depicted as the minimum and (optionally) 
maximum length
e. Official Stamp
(optional)
The following characteristics are not laid down in the ‘EU
quality standards for bananas’, but should nevertheless be
adhered to:
2.7. Mango
The mango tree originates from the Indian/Burmese mon-
soon region. The Mango fruit (Mangifera indica L.) is the
most important tropical fruit after the banana, yet due to its
sensitivity to bruising, in terms of numbers, it plays only a
small role in world trade (fresh mango). Mango has been
disseminated for many years, and is cultivated in all warm
countries down to the sub-tropics. 
2.7.1. Botany
The mango belongs to the family of Anacardiaceous, a rap-
idly growing evergreen tree with a dense, outspread coro-
net. Its leaves grow alternately, and red-violet or bronze-
colored in the early stages, then of a dark-green, leathery
consistency. The blossoms are generally hermaphrodite,
and pollination occurs through flies and other insects.
Certain types of  mango need to be manually pollinated.
Mango blossom up to 3 times a year, depending on climate
and fertilization conditions. If the first blossom is not pol-
linated, a new blossom is induced.
Ripe fruits are between yellow, orange-yellow, red or
red-green in color, and contain a flat stone that is very dif-
ficult to separate from the thick fibers of the pulp. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
109
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 19: 
Quality Characteristic for Banana
Quality Characteristics Minimum and Maximum Values
HEAVY METALS
lead (Pb) max. 0.50 mg/kg
Cadmium (Cd) max. 0.05 mg/kg
Mercury (Hg) max. 0.03 mg/kg
RESIDUES
Pesticides not measurable
Sulphur oxide not measurable
Bromide not measurable
Ethylene oxide not measurable
Mango tree with fruits
Mango trees can reach a height of 40 m. In a diversified
agro-forestry or mixed cultivation system, it belongs to the
uppermost trees, alongside, or under which, according to
site conditions (soil, rainfall, humidity etc.), a variety of
cultures can be planted.
2.7.2. Varieties and Countries of
Origin
The varieties differ in taste, size, shape and texture. India
has the largest variety. But a variety of different trading
types are also available in Florida. One typical characteristic
of mangoes is its alternation, which is also strongly dependant
on variety. Balanced nutritional and climatic conditions
will have a positive effect on fruit development. For this
reason, strongly alternating varieties can offer a steady
harvest when the supply of nutrients is well-balanced.
In principle, it is possible to differentiate between two
large groups of mango according to their origin: A group
from Indo-china/Philippines, and one coming from India.
Latin American varieties are crossbreeds of both. Using
the varieties “Mulgoba” and “Cambodiana” as an example,
all of the different variety characteristics can be displayed:
Certified organic mangoes are mostly exported to
Europe from the following countries: Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Columbia (dried), Costa Rica, Dominican
Republic (pulp), Ghana, Guinea, India (fresh, dried and
pulp), Madagascar, Senegal (fresh and dried), South Africa,
Togo, Uganda, USA, Venezuela (pulp).
2.7.3. Uses and Contents
Mango has many uses. Young fruits whose tegument have
not yet hardened are used in Asiatic countries as a vegetable,
fresh or pickled. In Latin American countries, slightly
unripe pulp is eaten with some salt. 
Ripened fruits are eaten fresh everywhere, can be made
juice or marmalade, and also dried and made into candy
(compare chapter 2.11). All remnants from the fruits can be
used as animal feed (e.g. for pigs). The young leaves for
example are very good as cattle feed, because they have a
protein content of 8-9% and a high Ca content as well. The
bark and leaves of mango trees can also be used as a dye for
cloth. The wood of the trees is highly suitable for mak-
ing charcoal.
13 REHM, S. und ESPIG, G.: (1996) Die Kulturpflanzen der Tropen
und Subtropen, Ulmer Verlag.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
110
Table 20: 
Characteristics of the Two Different Varieties
Mulgoba and Cambodiana
Characteristic Mulgoba Cambodiana
Country of origin India Indo-China/Philippines 
Shape variable, mostly round, Somewhat flat, elongated
elongated
Color Bright red, purplish or Yellow-green when ripe,  
bright yellow seldom purple
Fiber content Variable, with/without fiber No fibers 
possible
Taste Sweet, little sour, very aromatic Sweet, little sour, very aromatic
Seeds One embryo several Embryos
Susceptibility to very Yes to not very 
anthracnose
Table 21: 
Contents and amounts in 100 g fresh pulp13
Contents Amount 
Water 87 g
Edible carbohydrates 11 g
Raw fat 0,7 g
Raw fibers 0,7 g
Vitamin A 1000-3000 I.E.
Vitamin C 30 mg
Energy in kJ 210 kJ
Reduction before eating (%) 34%
2.7.4. Aspects of Plant Cultivation 
Site Requirements 
The mango grows best in tropical summer rain regions, at
temperatures between 24°C and 28°C. Despite being fully
foliated, the trees are remarkably resistant against drying
out. A dry period or cooler temperatures enliven the
blossoming and the production of mangoes. A period of
respite in the growth of vegetation is necessary to enable
blossoming. The trees will therefore not produce any fruits
in those moist tropical regions that lack a definite seasonal
rainfall or temperature fluctuations.
Mango trees can also thrive in the sub-tropics (Egypt,
Israel). Some varieties can even withstand a light frost.
Young seedlings must nevertheless be protected from
damage from frost (e.g. with straw or palm leaves). 
Mangoes have few soil requirements. A healthy, high
yielding plantation is nevertheless only possible on fertile,
deep and well-drained ground.
Seeds and Seedlings
There are many different varieties of mangoes. Different
varieties are preferred in different regions (differences in
the taste, texture and color of the pulp etc.). The most
popular varieties have mono-embryonic seeds, and can
therefore only be pollinated vegetative. This has the
advantage of producing a uniform product, while seedlings
(fruit with poly-embryonic seeds) can even segregate a parent
plant very strongly, producing very heterogeneous fruit.
Seedlings are used on mango plantations as rootstocks,
to which the scions are either grafted  (diagonal cuts of the
same size in both scion and rootstock are then bound
together) or budded (the scions are cut diagonally, while the
bark of the rootstock is cut and then pulled out to form a
pocket. The scion is then pushed inside the bark and tied up
again) in tree nurseries. This work requires much experience,
and is therefore usually carried out by state propagation
facilities. It is only worth setting up your own tree nursery
when a large scale mango plantation is planned, and should
then also only be carried out with the co-operation of an
advisory center.
Propagation
Propagation is usually carried out in the following way:
Mango seeds are selected from the fruits of healthy, well-
grown parent trees. In tree nurseries,  polyethylene bags
(PE bags) are used. The PE bags need to have a diameter of
around 15 cm , and be about 30-40 cm high. The best earth
to use is 50% well rotted compost and 50% top soil
(humus-rich earth which has best yet not been agriculturally
cultivated). The best place to cultivate seedlings is in half-
shadow (e.g. a shadow canopy, palm leaves). When they
have reached a height of around 50 cm and 8-10 mm
diameter, the seedlings are then grafted or budded with the
chosen scion.
In selecting parent trees for scions, choose those that
have well-developed coronets, are the of right variety, and
have plentiful blossoms and fruit over the years. You should
therefore have been able to observe the trees over a number
of years, or know someone else who has. To bud, choose
scions from young woody twigs that are somewhat thinner
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
111
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Mango nursery.
than the seedling rootstocks in the tree nurseries. Remove
the leaves from the twig one week before cutting away the
scion, which is cut to a length of 10 cm. 
After budding, the seedlings remain 4 weeks longer in
the nursery before being planted out the fields. The hole
should be at least 40 x 40 cm big and 50 cm deep, according
to local conditions. Mix in 5 shovels of compost with the
excavated earth. Part of this is then stamped into the hole in
order to make contact with the earth. Then the seedling is
planted with the rest of the soil, and again, pressed firmly
down. In order to save on irrigation, it is best to plant out at
the beginning of the rainy season, which means that the
plant will be encouraged to grow during the dry period.
Flower Formation
Young seedlings blossom in the first year. They should not
be allowed to carry fruit though, as this would inhibit the
growth of the tree. To encourage growth, the blossoms are
therefore plucked away until the 4th year. 
2.7.5. Planting Methods
The method chosen for planting is dependent upon the way
they are being cultivated and the site conditions. On a
mango plantation where mangoes are the main fruit sort,
the following distances between plants must be upheld:
< On fertile ground with sufficient rainfall 10 x 10 m 
< at semi-arid sites up to 15 x 15 m 
Because mango trees grow rather slowly, it can take a rela-
tively long time (up to 15 years) for the trees to occupy the room
allotted to them. During this development phase, several possi-
bilities exist to use the space available in a balanced way:
When the soil quality and rainfall are sufficient, plants
that quickly produce fruit can be planted between the rows
of mango trees, e.g. Papaya, Banana or pineapple.
Making use of the surfaces for sowing of green manure
plants (compare chapter 2.7.4.).
2.7.6. Diversification Strategies
Quite often, mangoes are planted in the mixed crop systems
of the house gardens in small farmholdings, or on exten-
sively cultivated meadows and marginal ground, where
relatively acceptable harvests can be achieved.
On organic farms, mango should also be integrated into
a mixed crop systems. On the one hand, this will reduce the
risk of pests through a large population of useful insects,
and on the other, the risk to the harvest engendered by the
natural alternation of mango can also be lessened.
Annual plants such as maize, hibiscus, beans, etc. can
be planted during the early growth period, according to site
conditions. If the soil and climatic conditions allow, more
demanding crops such as papaya (a culture with a 3-5 year
vegetation period), bananas (20 years and longer) as well as
avocado, mangosteen (Rheedia ssp., Achachairú), corossol
(Anona muricata), coconut, lemons, nutmeg and many
more can also be planted along with mango. 
At sites with poor or dry soil, it is possible to cultivate a
mixed-crop system with such low-demand crops as pineapple,
guava, cashew, figs or other annona varieties. 
Pasture land can slowly be transformed into better
cultivating land by planting mangoes and guavas, if the
grazing is controlled or cut as feed.
The following criteria should be heeded when choosing
plants to include in a cultivation system with mango:
< Intercropping plants as well as green cover crops 
cannot be watered for a 2 month phase during the dry
period or the mangoes will form an insufficient
amount of blossoms.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
112
< The bottom crops should not contain a high percentage
of legumes, because the accumulation of nitrogen
would otherwise inhibit the growth of the Mango tree,
which then limits the production of fruit.
If the spaces between the fruit trees are to be used as
crop acreage, it makes sense to establish a fruit rotation
system. A phase with fruit, beans, vegetables, other fruits
(e.g. pineapple) and animal feed is possible here. If the
shade allows it, bell peppers, tomatoes and egg plants etc
are also a possibility.
2.7.7. Nutrients and Organic
Fertilization Management
Nutrient Requirements
Mangoes require few nutrients. Nevertheless, it is advisable
to supply a mango plantation with compost and green
manure during the growth period. The fertilizer should be
applied after the tree has blossomed, so that it has enough
nutrients to produce fruit. A high level of production can be
achieved in this way by supplying compost in the mixed
system of domestic garden.
If the mangoes are on a plantation with other crops, then
care must be taken not to supply fertilizer to the other crops
during the time that the flower buds appear on the mangoes
(e.g. that bottom crops are not irrigated during the first
2 months of the dry season), otherwise spoiling the
production of buds.
Special care should be taken that nitrogen is not made
too readily available when beans are used as a bottom
crops, because the vegetative growth of the fruit trees
would then dominate.
Average harvests over several years under less than
optimum conditions usually yield between 5 and 10 tons
per ha and year. The yields per tree can vary, and can deliver
between 100 and 500 kg, according to conditions. The
yields in household garden systems can be significantly
more in comparison to mango plantations.
2.7.8. Biological Methods of Plant
Protection
Diseases
The most common diseases with mango trees are fungus
and bacterial diseases. The first important preventative
measure is make sure that the propagation segments are
healthy. The scions that were raised in tree nurseries and
whose origins are perhaps unclear should be carefully
examined. They shall not have been treated with any syn-
thetic or chemical agents.
Anthracnose, caused by the fungus Colletotrichum
gloeosporioides, is the most wide-spread disease among
mangoes. The varieties vary in susceptibility. Colletotrichum
gloeosporioides causes anthracnose on fruits, and drop of
flowers on young branches. Anthracnose always appears as
a result of scurvy (Elsinoe mangiferae). Fruits stricken with
anthracnose can be plunged into a hot water bath (3-5
min./55°C), in order to kill off the fungus. Preventative
measures are nevertheless preferable, to preclude injuries
and an infection with scurvy, because anthracnose can usu-
ally only take hold on damaged fruits that are also affected
by scurvy. A case of scurvy can usually be prevented by
removing all dead plant material (branches, leaves and
fruit). In exceptional cases, the fungus can be brought
under control again with 1% Bordeaux Mixture14.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
113
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 22: 
Yields that can be achieved under good conditions
(without taking alternation into account)
Variety (examples) Yield per ha
Keitt, Tommy Atkins 30 tons
Kent, Palmer, Irwin 25 tons
Haden 10 tons
While anthracnose generally attacks ripe fruits (only
seldom the blossoms), a bacterial infection from Erwinia
sp. can also affect young fruit. The symptoms are very sim-
ilar to the flecks caused to the leaves and fruit by anthrac-
nose. The bacteria usually survive in the ground – a heavy
rainfall will then splash the spores against the lower leaves
and fruits. Covering the ground can therefore help to pro-
tect against this. Active life in the soil will also help to pre-
vent an explosive growth of bacteria. Sites where it can rain
inside the blossoms can also be a problem.
Young fruit and also blossoms can be damaged by powdery
mildew (Oïdium mangiferae). This fungus grows during
warm and moist weather, during blossoming and when the
fruit appears. A case of powdery mildew can dramatically
affect the harvest. An open, well-ventilated population and
regular cutting back of the coronets can best help to prevent
mildew. In acute cases, mildew can also be brought under
control with sulphur. When carrying this out, there should be
no wind blowing, and the leaves should still be moist with dew.
The leaf spot disease (Cercospora mangiferae) on
mangoes is visible as dented spots on leaves and fruit. The
same applies for this fungus, an open and quick-drying
population is the best protection against infection. 
Fruit infected with Cercospora can no longer be sold; further-
more, both the leaf spot disease and scurvy prepare the way for a
case of anthracnose. In exceptional cases, the leaf spot disease can
be brought under control again with 1% Bordeaux Mixture15.
14 According to the European Regulation for Organic Agriculture (EEC)
2092/91 the use of copper preparations for plant protection (e.g.
Bordeaux Mixture) is allowed for a transitional period which will end
at the 31st of March 2002. However, any use of copper preparations
until 2002 has to be approved by the certification body.  In case copper
preparations have to be applied it is recommended to use preparations
which contain less copper and therefore to reduce the accumulation of
copper in soils (e.g. tribasic copper sulphate, copper hydroxide).
15 Compare footnote No. 13
Pests
The worst pests for mangoes are cotton scales, mealy bugs,
cicadas and black flies (create honey dew). These are all
sucking insects that live on the leaves, young buds and
shoots. They can cause a lot of damage. Yet they all have
natural enemies, such as e.g. ladybird larvae, wasps, spiders
and other types, such as parasitic fungi e.g. with cicadas
and black flies.
An ecological plantation with a variety of crops, enough
plots under different crops e.g. forest and a sufficient
amount of vegetation to cover the soil and enrich the variety
of species (e.g. mulching only right after the plants have
flowered) will provide enough enemies to combat the pests
so that measures against them are usually unnecessary.
Cicadas are averse to open, well ventilated soil; also, the
soil must be drained well to avoid wet patches.
In emergencies, the following methods should help:
< Scale insects can be regulated with a “winter-spraying”,
i.e. with paraffin oil (white oil) shortly before the larvae
hatch from their eggs. The paraffin oil is sprayed on as
a 3 % water emulsion.
< Plant spraying mixtures made of stinging nettles or
Neem16 can be used against cicadas. The worst damage
occurs during blossoming, so the plantation should be
checked regularly around this time in order to make up
the brew and spray it early enough
< Mealy bugs lay their eggs on the ground next to the trunk.
By wrapping smooth plastic bands around the trunk, the
larvae can be prevented from infesting too large an area.
Should they infest the tree, a solution of 1% soft soap
(potassium soap) with 1 % pure alcohol is quite effective.
16 According to the European Regulation for Organic Agriculture (EEC)
2092/91 the application of Neem preparations is restricted and only
allowed for the production of seed and seedlings. This regulation is
discussed controversial. An up-date information is available from
your certification body.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
114
< Black fly can be kept under control by useful insects.
A variety of prospatella species can be of use here.
This requires a good functioning control system
because the useful larvae need to be made properly
available for timely release. Where this is not possible,
spraying white oil shortly before the  pests hatch, in
the case of scale insects, may be sufficient.
2.7.9. Crop Cultivation and
Maintenance
Young Plants
In a newly set up plantation or when young mango plants
are being planted in an existing plantation, the young trees
can be planted together with the other crops. The other
crops, that only have a short life-cycle, will not disrupt the
mango’s growth (as long as they are harvested afterwards).
This also applies to crops with medium-long vegetation
cycles, e.g. bananas or papaya. As soon as these enter their
ripening phase and end their life-cycle (papaya after 4-5
years) they need to be removed. The resulting vegetative
material is then hacked up and spread across the soil. This
also applies with secondary forest systems that neverthe-
less need to be cut back regularly. As soon as the mango
trees enter into their harvesting phase, the trees that belong
to the species comprising the  secondary forest system
should be cut back far enough so that the mango trees’ tips
are at least on the same level as they are and are not covered
by them. The area around the trunks must be kept covered
with mulching material. This can either be gained from the
mown natural vegetation or the cuttings that become
available, as well as from palm leaves. The material should
be spread carefully so that it does not touch the trunk, and
thus give rise to fungus infections.
The soil between the trees can be used as crop acreage.
Should this be impossible due to site conditions (e.g. too
little rainfall), the naturally growing vegetation should be
left to grow and then cut down before it blossoms in order
to encourage the establishment of useful insects and to pro-
duce bio-mass. These are then mown down to provide a
mulching layer that protects the soil, to aid the tilts of the
soil and to positively influence the water-retaining capacity
of the soil. 
Mango trees react positively to being cut . It can become
necessary in mixed cultivation systems to limit the height
of growth and the crown diameter by pruning. Pruning
stimulates the production of new shoots and thus provides
more bio-mass. Using this method regularly, sites with
only minimal organic material can help to raise the fertility
of the soil.
Crop Monitoring
In addition to measures such as pruning the trees, applying
fertilizer, caring for the bottom crops, occasional crop
protective measures and harvesting, it is also necessary to
regularly check on the development of the fruits. If the
crown is well formed during the early stages of the trees,
and allows enough light to filter through and air to circulate,
then only old, dead wood needs to be removed. The devel-
opment of blossoms and fruit must be checked regularly.
The alternating phases of mango yields also need to be taken
into account. In addition to this alternation, poor blossoms
and fruit development can have several causes. In the case
of young trees, too much nitrogen (either through fertilizers
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
115
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
A Mango orchard.
or from a bottom culture with a high legume content) can
prevent blossoming, as can watering the bottom crops during
the blossoming period. In addition, an over-ageing of the
crown in older trees can also lead to a lack of fruiting lateral.
This can be alleviated with rejuvenation pruning.
The possible appearance of diseases and pests also
needs to be monitored during the fruit development stage
so that the necessary measures can be taken (compare
chapter 2.7.6.). This is especially important when a heavy
infestation of scales or black fly appears, as these need to
be sprayed with white oil precisely before the larvae
hatch.
As the harvesting period nears, regular checks need to be
made to predict the correct time (compare chapter 2.7.8.).
Fruit harvested too early or too late will suffer massive
disadvantages in the market, as fruit harvested too early
will not keep for very long.
2.7.10. Harvesting and Post-harvest
Treatment
With hundreds of varieties, mangoes are differentiated by
weight (250 g to 2 kg), shape (oval, pear or kidney-shaped),
color of the skin (green, yellow, orange-yellow, orange-red)
and taste (more or less aromatically sweet). The flesh is
yellow to yellow-orange, juicy and has a varying fiber
content according to variety, whereby fruits with a high
fiber content are generally not sold as fresh fruit, but are
processed to remove fibers. Mangoes have many different
uses. Ripe fruits can be eaten fresh, or processed into juice,
pulp, concentrate, candied fruits, jams, chutneys, canned
fruits or dried.
If the mangoes are to be sold as fresh fruits, they must
be treated with warm bath water to remove any dirt or fun-
guses from the peel. It is recommendable to place them in
a 55°C water bath for 5 minutes and then let them cool
down slowly. Afterwards, they are dried, sorted, classified,
packed and stored before shipment.
< The EU quality standards are shown in the Annex
Harvesting
A mango plantation will supply its first commercially
marketable amount of fruit around 4-5 years after being
planted.
At the end of the fruit’s development period, the peel
will turn leathery. The fruit is ripe for harvesting when the
skin has turned from green to red or yellow. Some farmers
wait to harvest until the first fruits have fallen to the ground
of their own accord. Yet because the fruits fail to ripen at the
same time, the color change must nevertheless be checked
regularly.
The fruits are harvested by breaking them off or with a
pair of scissors. A pair of steps or a cherry-picker will be
needed for tall trees. With medium tall trees (up to ca. 4 m),
the fruits can be picked individually with the help of a
harvesting rod. Too many fruits should not be placed into
one sack to avoid bruising them. Such fruits will not keep
for long, and cannot be sold as fresh. Any damaged fruits
should be separated during harvesting to prevent the spread
of fungus infections.
Post Harvest Treatment
Usually, post harvest handling is not required. For safety 
reasons, treatment with warm water is recommended (see below),
and is absolutely necessary in cases of anthracnose infection.
The fruits are packed into sturdy cases. They are sorted
visually, because machine sorting is expensive and compli-
cated. For export to Europe, sizes from 270 g to 335 g. are
preferable.
The fruits are generally packed in untreated wood wool,
free from harmful substances, to prevent them lying too
close to one another.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
116
The cases must also be well aerated. Cartons which
hold 5 kg of fruit have become standard for export to
Europe, as this size is also easily managed in the retail
business.
Packaging and Storage
Packaging
The regulations concerning carton labeling were dealt with
in section VI of the “UN/ECE standard FFV – 45 for
mangoes”.
Storage
< Mangoes that are not fully ripened and are to be
shipped by sea should be stored at a relative humidity
of 90% and not under 12°C.
< Fully ripened mangoes that are to be shipped by sea
should be stored at a relative humidity of 90% and at 
a temperature of 10°C.
2.7.11. Product Specifications and
Quality Standards
The “UN/ECE standard FFV – 45” defines the quality
requirements for trading with fresh mangoes. These do
not necessarily have to be adhered to, yet supply
recommended guidelines. Mangoes intended for export
are not included here. Different minimum and maxi-
mum values can be agreed upon between importers
and exporters, providing they do not clash with off icial
regulations.
The following is an excerpt from “UN/ECE standard
FFV – 45 for mangoes”:
(I) DEFINING TERMS
These standards apply to mangoes Mangifera indica L.,
that are delivered fresh to consumers.
(II) QUALITY CHARACTERISTICS REGULATIONS 
a. Minimum Requirements
< The mangoes must be as follows:
< Fresh and healthy
< Clean, practically free of visible foreign substances
< Practically free of pests and damage caused by them
< Free of fungus
< Free of bruising and frost-damage
< Free of strange taste of smell
< Well developed, ripe
b. Classifications
Mangoes are sold in three categories:
< Class Extra
Mangoes in this class must be of the highest quality.
They must possess the characteristics typical of their
variety and/or trading type. The fruits must be unblem-
ished, with the exception of very light surface flaws that
do not detract from the fruit’s general appearance,
quality, the time it will keep.
< Class 1
Mangoes in this class must be of good quality. They
must possess the characteristics typical of their variety
and/or trading type. The following blemishes are per-
missible, providing they do not detract from the fruit’s
general appearance, quality, the time it will keep and the
presentation of the bunch or cluster in its packaging:
- Slightly misshapen
- Light flaws in the skin caused by friction or by 
other means, providing the area does not exceed 
3, 4 or 5 cm2 of the total surface area of the 
appropriate size class A, B, or C. 
< Class 2
This class is composed of those mangoes that cannot be
placed in the upper classes, yet which fulfill the defini-
tions of minimum requirements. The following faults
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
117
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
are allowed, providing the mangoes retain their essential
characteristics in terms of quality, preservation and
presentation:
- Shape defects,
- Skin flaws, caused by scratches, friction or other 
means, providing the area does not exceed 5, 6 or 
7 cm2 of the total surface area of the appropriate 
size class A, B, or C. 
(III) SIZE CLASSIFICATION REGULATIONS
(V) PRESENTATION REGULATIONS
a. Uniformity
< The contents of a carton must be uniform, and may
only contain mangoes of identical origin, variety
and/or trade type, and quality.
< The visible part of the carton must be representative 
of the entire contents.
b. Packaging
< The mangoes must be packed in a way that ensures
they are sufficiently protected
< Packing material used inside the carton must be new,
clean, and so shaped that it cannot cause any damage
to either the inside or outside of the fruit. The usage 
of materials such as papers and stickers with company
details on them is permitted providing the no toxic
inks, dyes or glues have been used. 
< The packaging must be free of all other materials.
(VI) REGULATIONS OF CARTON LABELING
Each carton must display the following details in unbroken,
legible, permanent letters visible from the outside:
a. Identification
< Name and address of the exporter and packer
b. Type of Product
< “Mangoes”, when the contents are not visible
< Name of the variety 
c. Origin of Product
< Country of origin, and optionally, national, regional or
local description
d. Commercial Characteristics
< Class
< Size (expressed in min. and max. weight)
< Size code (optional)
< Number of fruits 
Although the following values are not laid down in the
‘UN/ECE standard FFV – 45 for mangoes’ they should
nevertheless be adhered to:
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
118
Table 23: 
Mangoes are sorted according to their weight.
The fruits must weigh at least 200 grams.
Size Classes Weight Maximum Differences in Weight 
within a Class
A 200 - 350 g 75 g
B 351 - 550 g 100 g
C 551 - 800 g 125 g
Table 24: 
Commercial characteristics and values for Mangoes
Quality Characteristics Minimum and Maximum Values
HEAVY METALS
Lead (Pb) max. 0.50 mg/kg
Cadmium (Cd) max. 0.05 mg/kg
Mercury (Hg) max. 0.03 mg/kg
RESIDUES
Pesticides not measurable
Sulphur oxide not measurable
Bromide not measurable
Ethylene oxide not measurable
2.8. Pineapple
2.8.1. Botany
Pineapples (Ananas comosus L.) originate from tropical
South America. They are still cultivated there by the low-land
population, who has integrated them into their agroforestry
systems in a variety of ways. The varieties differ greatly in
both taste and shape. Each variety also has local types. All
pineapples are self-sterile and mostly free of seeds. The
seeds are therefore only inseminated via external sources.
The pineapple is a xerophyte, and can survive long dry
periods. Rainwater, mist and dew are collected by the
leaves and stored.
2.8.2. Varieties and Countries 
of Origin
Organically grown pineapples are found in the following
countries: Burundi, Cameroon, Columbia, Ghana, Guinea,
Honduras, India, Sri Lanka, Togo, Uganda, USA.
No special varieties can be recommended for organic
cultivation due to a lack of scientific research. One important
aspect is its lack of spikes, as also occurs amongst certain
cayenne varieties. Other differentiation characteristics are:
size, shape, flesh color, taste and transportability. In addition,
in many countries, local “varieties” are cultivated which are
either suited for planting on conventional plantations or in
agroforestry systems. In the latter case, a variety must be
chosen which has a sufficient shade tolerance.
2.8.3. Uses and Contents
Pineapples are eaten fresh or processed into dried fruits,
juice and as canned fruits
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
119
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
conventional production of pineapples.
Table 25: 
Contents and Weight in 100 g of the Edible Parts
of Pineapples
Content Weight 
water 86 g
Digestible carbohydrates 13 g
Raw fat 0,1 g
Raw fibers 0,5 g
Vitamin A 100 (20-200) I.E.
Vitamin C 30 mg
Energy 230 kJ
Waste before usage 40%
2.8.4. Aspects of Plant Cultivation 
Site Requirements
Pineapples as a plant of the first storey of a secondary
forest eco-system prefer semi-shadowed conditions. Under
the full strength of solar radiation, the fruits can develop
sun-burn, especially when they stand out to one side and are
no longer protected by the crown. 
For good harvests, 1000–1500 mm of rainfall is
necessary (600 mm and 2500 mm being the outer limits).
Pineapples prefer stable temperatures. Temperatures under
20°C can lead to metabolic disturbances and chlorotic dis-
coloring. For this reason, away from equatorial regions,
pineapples are generally only planted up to heights below
700 m. In warmer, wetter regions (near to the equator) the
growth period up to harvesting is 14-16 months, in cooler
regions 18-20 months.
Pineapples react very sensitively to stagnant water, and
sites must therefore be well drained. Planting in depressions
where stagnant water can accumulate should be avoided,
pineapples otherwise place relatively few demands on soil
type and fertility. Irrigation is only necessary when long 
dry period occur, although basin irrigation should be avoided.
Due to their relatively low requirements, pineapples can be
planted in degraded soil when the appropriate measures
are taken, and can help to gradually improve the soil to a
normal state.
Seeds and Seedlings
Pineapples vegetatively propagated by lateral shoots. The
best ones to use are the suckers at the base of the trunk. The
slips that form underneath the fruits are more numerous
and can be used, yet these only begin to shoot during the
second year. The lateral shoots can be stored in the shade
for up to 3 months and then planted in absolutely dry soil.
Only totally healthy and if possible large shoots should
be chosen (ca. 400-500 g in weight are best) in order to
ensure a uniform crop. The shoots growing underneath the
fruits can also tolerate dryness, yet not as well as the suck-
ers can because they are generally lighter in weight. All of
the shoots should be cut with a sharp knife to ensure that
the wounds are quickly sealed, or stored in a shady place to
heal and dry the wounds more quickly. This will hinder an
infection by dry-rot fungus. Care should be taken that no
mealy bugs are present in the shoots or on the leaf blades.
No soil should remain on the shoots to prevent an infection
by soil-borne fungus such as e.g. Phytophtora ssp. and/or
nematodes.
The fruit crowns can also be used for planting. The crop
can also be increased by planting single leaves, which will
then take up to 3 years before they produce any fruit.
Because the crops cannot be treated (dipping) with
insecticides/ fungicides on organic pineapple plantations,
the farmer is forced to pay particular attention to the quality
and origin of the shoots (diseases that can be transmitted
from crop to crop). This is especially the case for shoots
that have been bought. In principle, it is recommendable
to use shoots from the plantation itself and to work very
carefully.
Small-holdings farmers are generally forced to use
shoots from their own crops for economic reasons (small
amounts, high costs). By utilizing slips, a relatively large
number of plants can be produced in a short time, because
depending on the variety, one tree will produce up to 7-8
suitable shoots. Far fewer suckers are produced, though.
Due to their smaller size, the slips are first planted in a
shady place for a year before being transplanted. This is
especially recommended when the pineapples are to be
integrated within an agroforestry system, because otherwise,
the cultivation procedures will be hindered and the young
plants may not develop dynamically enough dynamic to
compete with the secondary crops.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
120
2.8.5 Planting Methods and
Cultivation Systems
In the majority of organic plantations, local varieties are
planted together with other crops either in agroforestry or
mixed crop systems. Examples exist where pineapples are
planted as a rotation-fruit with green fallow land and other
crops. The farming plan will depend upon which cultivation
form is adopted (agroforestry system, mixed crops as a
bottom culture, crop-rotation etc.).
Example: Pineapples in a Crop Rotation System
1. Planting Procedure
A variety of planting methods exist (one, two or three
rows) double rows prevail. The distances between the
plants or rows depend; upon the variety used (tall or short
plants) as well as the type of product desired (more plants
per hectare for fresh fruits than for fruits being made into
jams). Distances of 25-35 cm (using alternating planting
holes) between the plants are sufficient in double-row
systems, and 40-60 cm between the rows, with 75-90
cm between the double-rows. The distances should be
greater for tall varieties (e.g. Cayenne: 90 x 90 cm plant-
ing distance, 120 cm between the double-rows). The soil
should be neither water-logged nor completely dry. The
shoots should be pressed into soil that has been lightly
loosened and then filled in again. They should not be
pressed in too deeply, and the vegetation point where the
leaves will sprout must lie above the surface.
Non-climbing legumes (e.g. Arachis pintoi) can be
sowed to cover the ground (protection against erosion) and
to help suppress weeds before the pineapple shoots are
planted. 
2. Crop Rotation 
A pineapple monoculture is not permitted in organic farming
systems. The pineapples are integrated with the other crops
in rotation (e.g. peanuts, beans, rice, vegetables); after the
pineapples have been planted, a two up to three year break
must follow. To prepare the land used for pineapple pro-
duction green manuring plants like e.g. Vigna unguiculata,
Crotolaria juncea or Mucuna capitata can be sowed prior
to the pineapples.
3. Flower Formation
The flower formation is induced by ethylene. On conven-
tional pineapple farms, special preparations can be used to
induce flower formation to occur after only 10 months.
These preparations are not permitted on organic plantations.
This is also valid for carbide (CaC2). Neither in the
European Regulation for Organic Agriculture nor in the
IFOAM Basic Standards the use of carbide is permitted.
Nevertheless some certification bodies approve the use of
carbide in exceptional case by case decisions. Currently, the
EU-Commission is evaluating whether carbide should be
allowed in the future17. Should carbide be used , great care
must be taken to prevent any explosions when manufactur-
ing spraying mixtures (e.g. no copper containers!). 
17 An update information is available from your certification body.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
121
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 26: 
Examples of Differing Organic Cultivation
Systems
Country Variety System Marketing type
Ghana Smooth Crop rotation with different Export of fresh pineapples  
Cayenne crops plus undersowing of 
legumes (green manure)
India Local Agroforestry system Export of dried pineapples 
varieties 
Columbia ditto. Bottom crops in coffee Processing into jams, juices   
plantation etc.
Uganda ditto. Agroforestry system Export of fresh pineapples 
and dried pineapples
4. Protection Against “Sunburns”
Depending on the region, very intensive solar radiation
(and from a lack of shade on the plantation) can damage the
fruit  (sunburns). The only method of protection in these
cases is the intensive-intensive method of binding the
leaves around the fruits in order to cover them.
Example: Pineapples in Agroforestry Systems
1. Planting Procedure
Pineapples are an excellent choice to plant for a limited
time on young agroforestry systems. Pineapples as well as
papaya are well suited as so-called “nursery crops” to
raise trees, as they are less demanding regarding the soil
fertility. The way that pineapples are used on the planta-
tion, and the types of other trees and bushes chosen
depends on the site. In its early stages, a pineapple plant
requires a lot of light, yet later on, it will be capable of
growing even under a relatively thick roof of trees.
Pineapples can only be added under limited conditions
to systems that are already quite developed, or to older
plantations. 
The yields of pineapples in agroforestry systems are
significantly lower than those of mono culture planta-
tions. One of the main reasons for this is the relatively
low density of trees in agroforestry systems. Instead of
the 40,000 to 100,000 trees per hectare (according to
whether they are being grown for fresh fruit or to be
canned) on conventional mono-culture plantations, the
density lies at around 5,000-25,000 trees. Yet in the long-
term, these systems actually achieve greater stability
with a higher level of total productivity (along with the
pineapples, the other crops also turn in a harvest). In
addition, agroforestry systems, especially those in
regions near to the equator, adequately fulfill the
demands made upon an ecologically tenable and long-
lasting plantation system, which then also raises the soil
fertility even in the long-term. 
The following examples show a few of the possibilities
available on organic pineapple plantations:
< A SITE WITH POOR SOIL AND HEAVY GROWTH
OF GRAMINACEEN
Sites that have already been degraded by the damage
done by incorrect farming methods can reach a high
level of yield again by utilizing the natural regenera-
tion possibilities that eco-systems offer. The grass is
mown down and spread over the surface as mulching
material. Manioc and pineapples are planted in the
prepared field. Seeds from the undemanding trees and
bushes that naturally grow locally should be mixed
with the pineapples. The pineapples will grow under
the protection of the manioc. At the same time, the
many varieties of trees and bushes that establish
themselves should be left to their own accord. Only
the weeds and grass that thrive should be cut down and
spread over the surface. The tree vegetation should be
regularly cut back. In the course of time, more and
more demanding varieties can be planted where organ-
ic material is beginning to collect. The pineapple yield
will not be very high early on. In addition to the use of
the manioc and the improvement of the soil, the
pineapples can be processed into dried fruits. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
122
Pineapple intercropping with papaya.
< A SITE WITH RELATIVELY GOOD SOIL –
SYSTEM COMBINING LEMONS
Young lemon plantations (up to 5 years old with diam-
eters of 6 x 6 m) can be converted into agroforestry
systems.
A double row (0.5 x 1.0 m) of pineapple trees is sown
between the rows of lemon trees. A mixture of tree seeds
(Erytrina ssp., Inga ssp., as well as primary forest vari-
eties) is sown along with each pineapple, together with a
handful of compost to activate the initial development.
Additional bananas can be planted every 4 m. The pineapples
will develop very well in this system. The advantage lies
in that pineapples may be sold before the main harvesting
phase of the lemon trees has been reached. 
< A SIMPLE SYSTEM ON RELATIVELY GOOD
SOIL
Cuttings from 1.5-2 m tall Gliricida sepium and
Erytrina ssp are planted at 2 x 3 m.. In between, a double
row 1 x 1.5 m or 1 x 1 m of pineapples is planted, also
with a mix of Inga ssp. as well as other species. In this
relatively simple system, that is very similar to a young
secondary forest with few varieties, flower formation
can easily be influenced by altering the shade conditions.
The entire plantation can be eroded after 7-9 years and
will afterwards enjoy a greatly improved soil fertility.
< MIXED PLANTATION
Pineapples are easy to combine with other crops as a
bottom crop. In particular: coffee, cocoa, coconut,
cashew nuts, coconut and date palms, hevea (rubber),
avocado and also mangoes. 
2. Crop Rotation
In diverse agroforestry systems, crop rotation is unneces-
sary. However, if the pineapples are planted as bottom crops
in a mixed system, e.g. with oil or date palms, then the crop
rotation methods mentioned above must be adhered to. This
is the only way to avoid a heavy growth of pests and a
decrease in soil fertility.
3. Flower Formation
The flower formation in agroforestry systems can be
induced by selective tilling of the weeds and the cutting
back of trees 2 months before blossoming is set to occur.
The resulting sudden influx of light will have a similar
effect to using carbide. This enables the harvesting time to
be controlled in response to market demand (e.g. before or
after the usual regional harvesting season to gain a price
advantage).
4. Protection Against “Sunburn” 
Not applicable.
2.8.6. Nutrients and Organic
Fertilization Management
Nutrient Requirements
The nutrient requirements for 1 ton of fruits are ca. 1 kg N;
0.2 kg P; 2.5 kg K; 0.3 kg Ca and 0.1 kg Mg. 
A harvest of ca. 35 tons per year, would thus require
35 kg N, 7 kg P, 88 kg K, 11 kg Ca and 4 kg Mg. The amounts
given refer to research carried out on conventional plantations,
and are therefore only intended as orienting values.
The nutrient requirements of a crop rotation system is
mainly provided by green manure (green fallow land as a
first pre-crop, or sowing of non-climbing legumes). Deficits
in the potassium supply can be balanced out by the use of
wood ash (combined with compost). In exceptional cases,
the certification bodies will allow the use of potassium
magnesia. All of the remnants from the pineapples production
should be spread over the soil (composting or mulching).
In calculating the amounts of compost required, it
should be noted that the use of legumes as green cover
plants can supply significant amounts of nitrogen to the
soil. In this case, a compost with a rather high C/N ratio
should be used. If possible, the compost should be spread
in two separate lots. One half (ca. 2.5 tons) before planting,
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
123
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
and ca. 2.5 tons to induce the flower formation. If the
undergrowth is too dense, then either the entire compost
can be spread in one go before planting, or the under-
growth can be mulched together with the second lot of
compost. 
Pineapples planted in diverse agroforestry system will
usually have no need to be supplied with external, organic
fertilizer. The fewer varieties an agroforestry systems
contains (especially when leguminous trees are lacking),
the more the soil will require fertilization with compost (or
an undergrowth of soil-covering legumes).
2.8.7. Biological Methods of Plant
Protection
Pineapples seldom suffer from pests and diseases when
good growth conditions are prevalent. This requires, if
possible, using plants from the plantation itself. The
following pests and diseases occur especially in systems
that lack diversification.
< Rot root, caused by Phytophtora cinnamomi and other
fungi are only a problem in moist soils; pineapples
cannot be planted in soils prone to waterlogging. Soil
qualities can be improved by selective fruit rotations
and application of organic compost material.
< Thrips (carrier of the viral disease “yellow spot”) 
poses no serious problem in a well-balanced plantation
system. In chronic cases, liquid herbal manure can be
used, or in extreme situations, sulphur or pyrethrum18
sprayed among the crops.
18 The European Regulation for Organic Agriculture 2092/91 as well as
the IFOAM Basic Standards do only allow for the use of natural
pyrethrins (extract from the flower heads of Chrysanthemum).
Synthetical pyrethroids persist in the environment and are forbidden.
< Mealy bugs (Dysmicoccus brevipes) cause “wilt 
disease”. Mealy bugs are transmitted by ants. Should
the ant population gain the upper hand, due to a lack of
natural enemies such as birds or small mammals, an
infestation by lice can be significantly reduced by 
laying out sugar-water traps.
< Nematodes can appear in pineapple monoculture
plantations. Problems with nematodes occur only on
organic plantations, due to the normal practice of fruit
rotation. Care should nevertheless be taken when buy-
ing shoots or young plants.
2.8.8. Crop Cultivation and
Maintenance
Crop Monitoring
The following points need to be heeded when cultivating
pineapples:
< Choice of planting stock.
< Checking the site for water-logging. Should such areas
exist on site, these cannot be used to grow pineapples,
and soil improvement measures must be integrated
into the planning of a crop rotation system.
< The plantation must be regularly checked to make sure
that the pineapples are allowed uninhibited growth. 
An infestation of mealy bugs through ants must be
stopped as soon as possible, providing shade for the
fruits early enough might help. 
< In agroforestry systems, any shading  should be
thinned out 6 months ahead of a planned harvest in
order to induce flower formation.
< During harvesting, ripe fruits should be chosen
according to their coloration.
As soon as the plantation begins to produce fruit,
any harvested plants should be removed and cut up
before being spread over the soil. The plantation will
also need to be thinned out from time to time, because
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
124
suckers which continually develop may limit the
amount of room available for each individual plant.
Weed Management
Tilling weeds is diff icult to mechanize on pineapple
plantations, and in its usual form, is neither possible nor
desirable in agroforestry systems. When all possible
niches are already occupied with plants, weeds will have
little chance of gaining a foothold, and can also easily be
uprooted by hand. Mature weeds can be cut down with a
knife or pulled out and then cut up to be used for mulch
material. One preventative measure is to sow non-
climbing legumes before the pineapples are planted (e.g.
Pueraria ssp, Purearia phaseoloides develops strong
tendrils, and is not suitable for pineapples)., Arachis
pintoi, some Vigna ssp. among others). Usually, this
bottom culture will suppress the growth of weeds.
Depending upon the amount of water available, when
enough weeds have accumulated, these can be cut down
and used as mulching material.
2.8.9. Harvesting and Post-harvest
Treatment
Harvesting
The average harvest for Cayenne on conventional planta-
tions is around 35-40 tons/ha. The first year will usually
yield ca. 38 tons, and the following seasons ca. 25 tons/ha.
The fruits must be chopped down with a clean cut of a
knife, for if the fruits are torn off, these wounds will leave
behind ideal spots for fungus to develop.
The fruits should be harvested at the ideal time, and
this time is dependent upon how the pineapples will be
marketed. Fresh fruits destined for the local market are
plucked when almost ripe. Fresh pineapples destined
for export are harvested green-ripe or half-ripe (begin-
ning to turn yellow-green at the base of the fruit), and
can then be cool-stored for up  to 4 weeks (storage
temperature ca. 7°C). This enables the fruit to be trans-
ported by ship, instead of by an expensive and for
ecological reasons difficult to justify air-route. Because
of their low sugar-content, pineapples harvested too
early are unpopular amongst consumers (pineapples do
not ripen afterwards). This requires establishing a closed
cycle of cooling facilities and dependable transport/logistic
infrastructure.
The color of the skin is an important criteria in deter-
mining the ripeness of the fruit. Fruits destined for the
European market are often classified according to the
extent to which an orange-yellow coloring has spread up
from the base of the fruit: 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
125
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Selection of pineapples for export and sales.
< Ripeness-color 1: Only the base is orange-yellow.
< Ripeness-color 2: The orange- yellow color covers half
of the fruit.
< Ripeness-color 3: The orange- yellow color reaches
further up.
< Whole of the fruit.
In connection with the scale-scale of pineapple ripeness,
it is worth noting that chemicals often used to promote the
uniform coloring of the fruits are not permitted on organic
plantations.
Post-harvest Treatment
Post-harvest handling is usually limited to determining the
classification of the fruits according to their size.
2.8.10. Product Specifications and
Quality Standards
Fresh Pineapples
Depending on the variety, pineapples weigh between 0.9-4 kg,
Baby-pineapples are mostly less than 500 g. The white-yellow
fruit is contained in a hard, scaly, skin similar in structure to
pine-cones. Ripe fruits can be eaten fresh, or processed into
juice, jams, candied fruits, stored in cans or dried.
Fruits intended for export should be harvested half-ripe,
just when the color begins to change on their base. Juice
squeezed out of the middle of the fruit should then have a
“Brix”-value19 of at least 13%. After harvesting, the fruits are
then cleaned, the stalks cut to 2 cm, sorted, classified and
packed. 
< The EU Quality Standards are shown in the Annex! 
19 A Brix value is the measure of the concentration of sugars, acids, and
other identifying compounds in a juice. Every fruit juice has a slightly
different Brix value. 
Packaging and Storage
Packaging
The regulations concerning carton labeling were dealt with
in section VI of the “Codex Alimentarius Standard for
Pineapples”.
Storage
- Unripe, hard fruits that are at present not saleable 
can be stored at 11-13°C and 90-95% relative 
humidity for up to 3 weeks.
- Ripe fruits can be stored at 6-7°C and 90-95% 
relative humidity for up to 2 weeks.
Caution: temperatures under 5°C cause black-brown spots
to appear in the pulp. 
Annex: Quality Requirements
The “Codex Alimentarius Standard for Pineapples”
(Codex Stan 182-1993) defines the quality requirements
for trading with fresh pineapples. These do not necessarily
have to be adhered to, yet they supply recommended guide-
lines. Pineapples intended for export are not included here.
Different minimum and maximum values can be agreed
between importers and exporters, providing they do not
clash with official regulations.
The following is an excerpt from the “Codex Alimentarius
Standard for Pineapples (Codex Stan 182-1993)”:
(I) DEFINING TERMS
These standards apply to pineapples of Ananas comosus
Merr., that are delivered fresh to consumers.
(II) QUALITY CHARACTERISTICS REGULATIONS 
a. Minimum Requirements
The pineapples must be as follows:
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
126
< Fresh and healthy
< Clean, practically free of visible foreign substances
< Practically free of pests and damage caused by them
< Free of fungus
< Free of bruising and frost-damage
< Free of strange taste of smell
< Well developed, ripe
b. Classifications
Pineapples are sold in three categories:
< Class  Extra
Pineapples in this class must be of the highest quality.
They must possess the characteristics typical of their
variety and/or trading type. The fruits must be unblem-
ished, with the exception of very light surface flaws that
do not detract from the fruit’s general appearance, quality,
the time it will keep.
< Class 1
Pineapples in this class must be of good quality. They
must possess the characteristics typical of their variety
and/or trading type. The following blemishes are per-
missible, providing they do not detract from the fruit’s
general appearance, quality, the time it will keep and the
presentation of the bunch or cluster in their packaging:
- Slightly misshapen and discolored
- Light flaws in the skin caused by friction or by 
other means, providing the area does not exceed 
4 % of the total surface area of the fruit. 
< Class 2
This class is composed of those pineapples that cannot
be placed in the upper classes, yet fulfill the definitions
of minimum requirements. The following faults are
allowed, providing the pineapples retain their essential
characteristics in terms of quality, conservation and
presentation:
- Shape and color defects,
- Skin flaws, caused by scratches, friction or other 
means. 
The flaws are not permitted to affect the fruit’s pulp.
(III) SIZE CLASSIFICATION REGULATIONS
The pineapples are sorted according to weight. The fruits
must weigh at least 700 grams, with the exception of baby
pineapples, which must weigh a minimum of 400 grams.
(V) PRESENTATION REGULATIONS
a. Uniformity
< The contents of a carton must be uniform, and may
only contain pineapples of identical origin, variety
and/or trade type, and quality.
< The visible part of the carton must be representative 
of the entire contents.
b. Packaging
< The pineapples must be packed in a way that ensures
they are sufficiently protected
< Packing material used inside the carton must be new,
clean, and so shaped that it cannot cause any damage
to either the inside or outside of the fruit. The usage 
of materials such as papers and stickers with company
details on them is permitted providing the no toxic
inks, dyes or glues have been used. 
< The packaging must be free of all other materials.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
127
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 27: 
Pineapples sorted according to their weight
Reference letter Weight 
A 700 - 1000 g
B 1000 - 1200 g
C 1200 - 1600 g
D 1600 - 1800 g
E more than 1800 g
(VI) CARTON LABELING REGULATIONS
Each carton must display the following details in unbroken,
legible, permanent letters visible from the outside:
a. Identification
< Name and address of the exporter and packer
b. Type of Product
< “Pineapples”, when the contents are not visible
< Name of the variety 
c. Origin of Product
< Country of origin, and optionally, national, regional or
local description
d. Commercial Characteristics
< Class
< Size (reference letter or weight class)
< Number of fruits (optional)
< Net weight (optional)
Although the following values are not laid down in the
“Codex Alimentarius Standard for Pineapples” they should
nevertheless be adhered to:
2.9. Dates
The fruits of the date palm (Phoenix dactylifera L.) are sweet
berries with a sugar content of more than 50%. The origin of
the date palm (Phoenix dactylifera L.) is supposedly North
Africa or Middle East. In North Africa and in the Middle
East the date palm (Phoenix dactylifera L.) is a staple food
that can be produced easily under unfavorable natural and
economic conditions. Normally, this palm is cultivated for
subsistence/local markets on small holder farms along with
other crops. Because of its high nutritional value, great yields
and its long life (yielding up to 100 years) the date palm was
already mentioned as the “tree of life” in the Bible.
2.9.1. Botany
Phoenix dactylifera L. belongs to the Palmae (=Arecaceae)
family. There are other species with eatable berries like P.
atlantica A. Chev. And P. sylvestris Roxb.. But Phoenix
dactylifera L, having more nutritious and tasty berries, is
the only species with economic importance.
The date palm has a single stem of 15 to 30 m. Some 12
(0-25 range) flower buds develop during the winter in the
axils of some of the leaves just below the growing point.
The leaves ( 4 m long) can live up to 7 years, depending on
site conditions. During youth stage of the palm, shoots
develop from the buds in the leave axils. The shoots are
used for vegetative propagation. The inflorescence,
enveloped in a sheath or spate, pushes through the fiber on
the leaf base it originated from to a length of 25 to 100 cm.
There are 12 inflorescences every year.
The palm is dioeciously, which means there are male
and female plants. The yellowish flowers are small,
attached directly to the spike lets; male flowers are sweet-
scented and have six stamens, female flowers consist of
three carpel’s with ovules, of which normally only one will
develop into a fruit. For fruit setting, fertilization of the
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
128
Table 28: 
Quality Characteristics and Values or Pineapples
Quality Characteristics Minimum and Maximum Values
HEAVY METALS
lead (Pb) max. 0.50 mg/kg
Cadmium (Cd) max. 0.05 mg/kg
Mercury (Hg) max. 0.03 mg/kg
RESIDUES
Pesticides not measurable
Sulphur oxide not measurable
Bromide not measurable
Ethylene oxide not measurable
female flowers by male pollen is required, which in date
palm cultivation is not left to the wind or insects but is done
traditionally by hand. They insert a piece of spike let of male
flower at the moment when the female flowers are opening.
More modern methods will collect the pollen from the
males and in combination with a carrier (such as flour) will
be dusted on the female flowers with a mechanical device.
The development of the berries doesn’t take more than
five months. The color of the ripe berries is yellow and
brown red depending on the variety. There can be more than
200 berries in one inflorescence. 
The date palm may reach an age of over 100 years and
reach up to 30 m in height. As the high yielding period is
between 40 and 80 years, date palms are cut down earlier.
2.9.2. Varieties and Countries of
Origin
At the end of the nineteenth century date palm were culti-
vated solely in the “old world”. Nowadays, they cultiva-
tion takes place in many other regions of the world (e.g.
United States: California, Arizona, Texas; Mexico;
Brazil; Argentina; South Africa; Australia; Namibia).
Nevertheless, the highest production is still in the Arabic
area and in the Middle East. 
The following table gives an overview on different
commercially important date varieties.
Actually, three varieties are mostly required on the world
market:
Medjhool: big seize and attractive appearance
Deglet Nour: unique taste and mostly know in the Middle
Eastern
Barhi: preferred consumption at the Khalal stage 
(partially ripe)
Especially in the Republic of South Africa, Namibia,
Zimbabwe and in the Sahel-region, new plantations mainly
of Medjhool variety can be observed, whereas in the
Arabic countries, Medjhool and Barhi are mainly used for
new plantations.
In Egypt, Iran, Pakistan and Saudi Arabic the majority
of production is aimed at subsistence and local markets.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
129
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 29: 
World Date Production by Country in 1998
Country Quantity in MT
Iran 900.000
Egypt 750.000
Iraq 660.000
Saudi Arabia 600.000
Pakistan 535.000
Algeria 387.313
United Arab Emirates 250.000
Sudan 175.000
Oman 135.000
Libya 130.000
USA 019.050
Israel 009.760
Total 4.551.123
Table 30: 
Overview of  Different Commercially Important
Date Varieties
Variety Description of the Mature Fruit
Bahri Fresh consumption: at Khalal stage; Sweet and juicy, yellow in color, 
available only during harvest season 
Hayani Fresh consumption: black and shiny in color, long fruit and not too sweet
Medhjoul Dried date: large fruit, soft and sweet; light brown to dark brown 
in color
Amari Dried date: soft, sweet and medium seized date 
Deglet Nour Dried date: semi-soft and famous flavor, light to dark brown in color, 
harvested semi-dry
Hadrawi Dried date: sweet and fleshy date, dark brown (mahagony) in color)
Zahidi Dried Date: round, medium seized and not too sweet date, golden 
in color
On the contrary, countries like Iraq, Algeria, Marocco and
Tunisia are focusing on exports mainly to Europe. All in all
250.000 tons (estimation) are traded on international
markets, the majority is consumed locally.
Export orientation goes along with specialized farms,
packing stations and warehouses in order to comply with
international quality requirements. A negative impact of the
export/market orientation is the reduced number of date
varieties used for new plantations. The spread of only a few
higher yielding varieties increases the risk of damage by
pests and diseases. And, being the key species in very
fragile micro-environments (e.g. oases) date palms ensure
the biological diversity of oasis. Thus, by providing shade,
keeping moisture and stabilizing/protecting soils. Without
date palms, no other agricultural plants could be kept like
olives, citrus, pomegranates, figs, almonds, grapes, alfalfa,
beans and grains. A decrease in date varieties will have a
negative impact in the long run.
Therefore it is recommended not only for organic date
plantations but also for conventional ones to cultivate
different date varieties (high yielding improved varieties
for export and local varieties for domestic consumption and
local markets).
Currently, most of the world’s organic date cultivation
takes place in Egypt, Tunisia, Marocco, Israel and United
States.
2.9.3. Uses and Contents
Beside direct consumption of the whole dates, the fruits are
traditionally used to prepare a wide range of products such
as date juice concentrates (spread, syrup and liquid sugar),
fermented date products (wine, alcohol, vinegar, organic
acids) and date pastes for different uses (e.g. bakery and
confectionary). Also, the by-products arising from date
processing can be used for different purposes. Within agri-
cultural systems date press cake (by-product of date juice
production) as well as date pits can be used as animal feed-
stuff (also dates falling down from palms before maturity).
In case no other uses are possible, all organic waste material
arising from date processing shall be used in the very least
as a component for compost preparation at least.
Furthermore, a wide range of other date palm products
(beside the date fruit) exist because of the long tradition of
date cultivation in the “old world”. With respect to agriculture,
shreddered leaves can be used as feedstuff for ruminants as
well as a mulching material and/or a pooting medium for
horticulture production (high cation exchange capability).
All non-fruit components of the date palm (frond bases,
midrib, leaflets, spikelets, fruit stalks, spathes) have a certain
but limited value for ruminant feeding (in natural envi-
ronments with no or limited alternatives it should be used).
Leaves are very often used to construct fences providing
wind protection and creating favorable micro-climates for
horticulture and/or in nurseries. Also, date palms provide
construction material for different purposes (roofs, fences,
baskets, cranes, textiles etc.).
The nutritional value of dates is a high sugar content
(around 50-60%), potassium (2.5 more than bananas),
calcium, magnesium and iron as well as vitamins (B1,B2)
and Niacin. People eat fresh and/or dried dates. Dried dates
can easily be stored and preserved because of the naturally
high sugar content. 
2.9.4. Aspects of Plant Cultivation
Site Requirements
Temperature
Date palms require an arid climate (hot and dry) with a
temperature between 25° C to 32° C and a sufficient water
supply. Daily maximum temperature below 9° C and a
minimum temperature below 0°C are growth-inhibiting
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
130
and temperatures around -7°C cause damage. As a precondi-
tion for flowering date palms need temperatures over 18°C
(in the shade) and for fruit setting temperatures above 25°C.
Water
The daily water uptake of an adult date palm is estimated
with 150 to 200 l. Rain fed date palm cultivation is not
possible. To ensure growth and development of the berries
irrigation is needed. Rainfall and humidity leads to fungus
diseases and pollination is inhibited. Rainfall during final
maturation of the fruits can cause damage in many date
growing areas. 
Soil
Date palms grow on different types of soils, but the best
yields can be reached with sandy loams. Soils should be
permeable with a good drainage and a deep ground as roots
grow deep (6 meters) into the soil for water uptake. The
date palm is considered to have the highest salt tolerance
compared of all fruit crops. Also, alkaline soil conditions
with a pH up to 8 are tolerable.
*The numbers following ECe x 103 are the electrical conductivity values
of the saturation extracts in millimhos per cm at 25° C associated with a
50% decrease in yield.
Site Requirements of Different Varieties
The following table from DOWSON and PANSIOT shows
the site requirements of different varieties:
Seeds and Seedlings
Propagation of date palms can be done by using the seeds
(sexually) and by using the offshoots (asexually). Using
seeds, 50% will develop to male date palms that do not bear
fruits. For this reason, the use of offshoots (vegetative prop-
agation) is the most common method. Offshoots are cut
with a chisel and/or machete from proven female cultivars
and transplanted into a nursery with good growing conditions
(wind protection, shade trees, soil etc.) in order to support
the development of the roots. 
After one year, (or earlier) young date palms are trans-
planted to their permanent place. The right time for transplan-
tation depends on the development of the root system as well
as on the number of palm leaves (10 to 12 are recommended).
Sometimes offshoots already have developed roots at the
mother plant. In this cases offshoots can be planted directly.
In more intensive and specialized date palm planta-
tions seedlings are gained by tissue culture, to avoid the
propagation of pest and diseases. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
131
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 31: 
Overview of  Different Commercially Important
Date Varieties
High salt tolerance Medium salt tolerance Low salt tolerance
(ECe x 10_ = 18*) (ECe x 10_ = 10) (ECe x 10_ = 5)
Date Palm Pomegranate Pear Almond
Fig Apple, Apricot
Olive Orange, Peach
Grape Grapefruit, Strawberry
Table 32: 
Site requirements of different varieties of dates
Country Varieties Site Requirements
Tunisia, Algeria Bouhatem, Bouzeroua Kenta, suitable for early rain in autumn 
Aguewa
Irak, California, Dayri, Halawy, Kustawy small rain sensitivity 
Arizona
Algeria Iteema, Deglet Noor high rain sensitivity
Irak, Egypt Zahidi, Hayany low sensitivity against cold
Algeria Azerza, Taddala resistant against
Algeria Deglet Noor drought sensitive
Irak, Tunisia Sayer, Lemsi high salt resistance
2.9.5. Methods of Planting
In the traditional date orchards, and especially in the oasis,
the density of palms is very high with the intention to form
an almost closed canopy. The high density provides shade
and protection from wind, thus creating a micro-climate in
which the harsh conditions of a hot and dry climate are
tempered to make living conditions somewhat more
sustainable. However, the high density diminishes the oppor-
tunities for growing secondary crops and the introduction
of mechanization in date palm cultivation. 
In specialized plantations the most common planting
system is in a grid of 9mx9m (or 10mx10m) providing
space for the use of machines as well as for secondary
crops. In case an old plantation needs rejuvenation, young
date palms are planted very close to the old palms, to be
removed them when the young palm starts to bear fruits.
Sometimes date palms are planted around a field for arable
cropping and or horticulture production in combination
with other fruit trees.
The young date palms are planted in a hole (90cm deep
x 90cm wide) in order to put the roots closer to the water
table. In traditional cultivation systems, the alkaline earth is
removed and replaced by a mixture of organic manure, sand
and ash. In organic cultivation systems, it is recommend-
able to add also composted organic material.
It is recommendable to prepare the wholes two to three
months before planting. After planting the young date
palms are watered daily for at least one or two weeks. With
the objective of protecting the date palm and to improving
growing conditions, young plants should be surrounded by
fences (e.g. with cut date palm leaves). In addition a coat
out of straw and palm leaves is put around the shoot to
reduce water losses.
Normally, farmers choose the season with moderate
temperatures for planting. However, date palms can be planted
throughout the year provided sufficient water availability is
given. In order to provide natural pollination, two to three
male shoots are planted with approximately 100 female
shoots to gain pollens. 
Before planting new date plantation land has to be
prepared by building a drainage and irrigation system. Old
stems should be removed but old palm leaves should be
reduced to small pieces and brought into the soil by
plowing (provided the material is not infested with pests
and diseases). In some areas it is recommendable to establish
shelter belts of Tamarisk trees (Tamarix aphylla) and
Ironwood (Casuarina equisetifolia) before planting the
date palms. 
2.9.6. Diversification Strategies
Traditionally, intercropping with other fruit trees (citrus,
pomegranates, olives, grapes, guava) or arable crops (alfalfa,
barley, beans etc.) is practiced in many of the main production
areas. Without the shade provided by the date palms other
crops very often cannot grow. Organic cultivation does not
allow for monoculture systems. In particular, intercropping
with alfalfa and other legumes provides an enrichment of
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
132
Date Plantation in Jordania.
the soils with nitrogen as well as fodder for livestock
production. In addition to a site-appropriate mixed system
of date palms, arable crops and fruit trees date plantations
should be sheltered/surrounded by green fences (e.g. with
Polynesian Ironwood (Casuarina ssp.) or by stripes of
Spanish Reed (Arundo donax) within the plantation. Both
are multiple use plants in arid climates. 
2.9.7. Nutrients and Organic
Fertilization Management 
Nutrient Requirements
The following average amounts of nutrients are citied in the
literature looking on conventional date palm plantations:
500 g N (nitrogen), 300 g P (phosphorous) and 250 g K
(potassium). 
It has been shown that there is a stronger effect of
nitrogen in terms of yield and quality than Phosphorous
and Potassium. The effect of Phosphorous and Potassium
on yield and quality is not proven. 
Organic Fertilization Strategies
In organic cultivation fertilization strategies are based on
green manure and compost. This strategy doesn’t differ
much from the traditional way of fertilizing date palms.
Animal manure was applied by digging a trench around the
tree in order to bury the animal manure. Nitrogen was
provided by intercropping of alfalfa (and other appropriate
leguminous plants). Organic cultivation systems requires
for a sufficient supply with composted organic materials
(animal manure with other organic materials like straw and
other organic waste material) on a regular basis. At least
every 4 years compost should be added to the date palm.
For this reason, the compost must be brought into the soil
around the stem. Regular application of organic materials
improves the water holding capacity and therefore the
efficiency of irrigation. 
2.9.8. Biological Methods of Plant
Protection
Most of the problems concerning disease and pests have
the following causes:
< Monoculture cultivation and use of non-resistant
and/or of few varieties
< Insufficient distance between species that grow to the
same height; failure to trim agro forestry systems.
< Unfavorable soil conditions like degenerated or poor
soil, soil not deep enough for roots, lack of organic
material, high salinity etc.
< Unsuitable site conditions (deep water table, 
insufficient irrigation, drought, temperature, high 
rainfall level etc.)
In the case that diseases and/or pests occur in a date
plantation, the overall situation of a date plantation has to
be analyzed in order to identify the reasons. In this way, it
will be possible to develop site appropriate strategies to
prevent the outbreak of diseases/pests in the long run. 
In general, two major threats exist in conventional date
palm plantations, namely Red Palm Weevil (Rhyncophorus
ferrugineus) and Bayoud (Fusarium oxysporium). The
outbreak of both can be prevented by the strict use of non-
infested seedlings and strong hygienic precautions. Tissue
culture propagation of seedlings is the most successful way
to achieve this aim, but requires appropriate techniques and
facilities. The health status of date offshoots and seedlings
from nurseries needs to be clarified in order to avoid any
infestation of the plantation. In this context, it is of utmost
importance to implement regular disinfections of the
working tools, removal of infected palms, leaves or
inflorescences. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
133
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Diseases
Most occurring fungal diseases:
< Omphalia root rot: Triggered by Omphalia pigmentata
or O. tralucida. This fungus doesn’t exist in the stem,
only in the roots. 
< Inflorescence rot (and/or Bayoud): Triggered by
Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. Albedinis. This fungus
exists in the soil. Symptoms: white chlorite color and
fade of the palm leaves. Bad cultivation conditions and
an intensive cultivation of alfalfa and vegetables in
rotation supports an infection. The following varieties
have lower fruit quality but are supposed to be resistant
to inflorescence rot: Takerboucht, Bou Jigou,
Taadmant und Bou Stammi. 
< Diplodia disease: Triggered by Diplodia spp. Can
occur in young cultivations.
< Terminal bud rot: Triggered by Ceratocystis paradoxa.
Rot of the terminal buds in older palms.
< Khamedj: Triggered by Mauginiella scaettae. Rot 
of the flowers can lead to a total destruction of the
inflorescence.
< Fruit roots: Triggered by Aspergillus niger, Rhizopus
nigricans, Alternaria citri.
Pests 
< Cottony cushion scale: Parlatoria blanchardii and
Phoenicoccus marlatti are wide spread. Sucking on
the leaves leads to early death of the leaves. Cottony 
cushion scales need humidity and wind free areas
therefore they exist inside of the plantation. Biological
control is done with natural predators like bugs 
of the species Pharascymnus, Cybocephalus and
Chilocorus bipustulatus but also by appropriate 
methods of cultivation.
< Bryobia: Oligonychus afrasiaticus and
Paratetranychus simplex are wide spread in North
Africa and in the Middle East and O. pratensis in
California. Bryobias infest the leaves and unripe fruits.
They need dry and windy conditions. The use of
Arundo donax in mixed cultivation supports their
speading, therefore it is recommendable to use other
crops for mixed cultivation.
< Caterpillars: Most common are the caterpillars 
of the butterfly Ephestia cautella and Batrachedra
amydraula, which eat the leaves and penetrate into the
fruits. Bacillus Thuringiensis is used for biological
control.
< Bugs: Rhinoceros bug of the species Oryctes spp.
They eat tissue of the young leaves and destroy 
the area of vegetation. There are different biological
control possibilities: Removal of their hotbeds like 
rotten plant material and green manure. Artificial
preparation of hotbeds for catching, biological control
by the fungus Metarrhizium anisopliae and the virus
Rhabdionvirus oryctes.
< Fruit bugs of the species Cotinis texana, Carpophilus
hemipterus, Coccotrypes dactyliperda. They destroy
ripe fruits and inflorescences. Inflorescences are
wrapped with bags as a rescue measure.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
134
Plantation of Dates in Jordania.
Rodents
As in other palm crops rats, mice and other rodents may
cause damage on the trunk as well as on the fruits. For this
reason it is recommendable to support predators like owls
with the objective as controlling the rodent population in the
date plantation. Another mechanical way of reducing fruit
damages is to place a mechanical device around the stem in
order to make it impossible for rodents to climb up the tree. 
2.9.9. Crop Monitoring and
Maintenance 
Regular activities during a growing season are:
In intensive date plantations machines (cranes) are used to
lift the workers for artificial pollination, maintenance work
and harvesting.
< Artificial pollination
< Protection of inflorescences by bags
< Bunch management
In this case, it is important to remove some elements to
avoid nutritional competition, at the growing point. Normally,
the age limit is less (between 40 and 80 years is the high
yielding period), consequently the height will not be more
than 15-25 m maximum before it is cut down because of
declining yield and increasing difficulty (and danger) in
reaching the crown during pollination, bunch management
and harvesting.
2.9.10. Harvesting and Post-harvest
Treatment
Harvesting
The color of the dates indicates the right harvesting time. At
the “Khalal” stage dates are partially-ripe showing a yellow
or red color (depends on the variety). At this stage some
dates are already harvested in spite of the fact that the
moisture and tannin content is still very high. Most of the
dates are harvested at the fully-ripe stage showing a color.
Furthermore, the sugar content is higher and/or moisture
and tannin content is lower.
Harvesting is labor intensive as dates are hand picked.
In intensive date plantations cranes are used to lift up the
workers. However, in most of the cases, workers have to
climb up the date palm in order to reach the fruit brunches. 
Overall country averages in the main production
regions do not go much higher than 20-30 kg/palm/year,
though the production inputs are also less (fertilizers,
pesticides) and generally the palms are very closely
spaced. Even so, in well organized date plantations, yields
may reach over 100 kg/palm/year under favorable environ-
mental conditions. At the age of 30 years date palms reach
the high-yielding period. 
Preparation, Transport and Storage
After harvesting dates are sorted, washed in drinking water,
air dried (45°C), resorted and packed. Sorting of dates is
done manually. While sorting workers can remove dates
with any indication of infestation as well as other particles
and damaged dates.
Fruit Harvesting
Sorting
Washing
Drying
Sorting
Packing
Storage 
Air-drying should result with a moisture content of 20%
or below in order to prevent incidence of molds and yeasts.
Storage of dates depends on anticipated duration of storage
as well as on the variety of dates. The optimum storage
temperature is 0° C which allows for a storage period of
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
135
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
up to 6 - 12 months. Semi-soft dates like Deglet Noor and
Halawy have a longer storage life than soft dates like
Medjool and Barhi. For longer storage durations it is possible
to freeze the dates (-18°C). In case dates are stored for a short
time; temperature shall be below 13°C (prevent insects to
cause feeding damages and reproduction) and/or below 5°C
(control of new insect infestation). The humidity in storage
rooms shall range between 70% and 75%. High moisture in
combination with higher temperature levels increases
enzymatic as well as non-enzymatic browning of dates.
Dates with insect infestation have to be treated in order
to maintain export quality. Unlike conventional dates the
use of methyl bromide and other chemical storage pesticides
is not allowed within management system for organic food.
Alternatively, disinfestations with 100% carbon dioxide for
1-2 days is recommended.
Other measurements to ensure product quality are:
< Avoidance of temperature fluctuations; otherwise,
moisture condensation on dates will support growth of
unwanted micro-organisms 
< Clean and hygienic conditions in packing houses, stor-
age rooms etc.
< Separated storage of dates as ripe dates absorb the aro-
ma of other products (e.g. garlic, onions, herbs, spices)
< Packaging of dates in nitrogen reduces enzymatic
browning (darkening) of dates (exclusion of oxygen).
2.9.11. Product Specifications and
Quality Standards
There is a wide range of date products offered in the market
like syrup, juice, jams, preserves and condiments. Dates are
often used as a component of food preparations like sweets,
confectionary, breakfast foods, desserts, baking products
and dried fruit and nut mixtures as well. The main share of
the organic date production is sold as fresh or dried fruit.
CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD FOR DATES 
(World-wide Standard)
A. SCOPE
This standard applies to commercially prepared whole
dates in pitted or un-pitted styles packed ready for direct
consumption. It does not apply to other forms such as
pieces or mashed dates or dates intended for industrial
purposes.
B. DESCRIPTION
Product Definition
Dates are the product prepared from sound fruit of the date
tree (Phoenix dactylifera L.) whose fruit:
(a) is harvested at the appropriate stage of maturity;
(b) is sorted and cleaned to remove defective fruit and
extraneous material;
(c) may be pitted and capped;
(d) may be dried or hydrated to adjust moisture content;
(e) may be washed and/or pasteurized; and
(f) is packaged in suitable containers to assure preservation
and protection of the product.
Varietal Types
Varietal types are classified as:
(a) Cane sugar varieties (containing mainly sucrose) such
as Daglat Nuur (Deglet Noor) and Daglat Beidha
(Deglet Beidha).
(b) Invert sugar varieties (containing mainly invert sugar -
glucose, and fructose) such as Barhi (Barhee), Saiidi
(Saidy),
(c) Khadraawi (Khadrawy), Hallaawi (Halawy), Zahdi
(Zahidi), and Sayir (Sayer)
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
136
Styles
Styles may be classified as:
(a) unpitted; and
(b) pitted.
Sub-styles
Sub-styles are as follows:
(a) Pressed - dates which are compressed into layers using
mechanical force.
(b) Unpressed or Loose - dates which are free-flowing or
packaged without mechanical force or compression.
(c) Clusters - dates with the main bunch stem attached.
Size Classification (Optional)
Dates may be designated as to size names in accordance
with the following charts:
(a) Unpitted dates (b) Pitted dates
Size No. of dates in 500g
Unpitted Dates
Small  . . . . . . . .more than 100
Medium  . . . . . . . . . .80 to 100
Large  . . . . . . . . . .less than 80
Pitted Dates
Small  . . . . . . . .more than 110
Medium  . . . . . . . . . .90 to 110
Large  . . . . . . . . . .less than 90
C. ESSENTIAL COMPOSITION AND QUALITY
FACTORS
Optional Ingredients
Dates from organic agriculture shall be kept as natural as
possible. Use of glucose syrup, sugars, flour, vegetable oils
as allowed according to the Codex Alimentarius for Dates
is not usual for organic qualities.
Quality Factors
General Requirements
Dates shall be prepared from such fruit and under such
practices so as to ensure that the finished product possess a
characteristic color and flavor for the variety and type, be of
proper stage of ripeness, free of live insects and insect eggs
and mites and meet the following additional requirements:
(a) Moisture Content (Maximum)
• Cane sugar varieties 26% 
• Invert sugar varieties 30%
(b) Size (minimum)
• Unpitted Dates: 4.75 gram
• Pitted Dates:  4.0 gram
(c) Pits (Stones)
• Not more than two pits or (in Pitted Style) 4 pieces 
of pit per 100 dates
• (d) Mineral impurities 
Not more than 1 g/kg
Definition of Defects
(a) Blemishes
- Scars, discoloration, sunburn, dark spots, black nose
or similar abnormalities in surface appearance affecting
an aggregate area greater than that of a circle 7 mm in
diameter.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
137
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
(b) Damaged
- (Unpitted dates only) - dates affected by mashing
and/or tearing of the flesh exposing the pit or to such an
extent that it significantly detracts from the visual
appearance of the date.
(c) Unripe Dates 
- Dates which may be light in weight, light in color, have
shriveled or little flesh or a decidedly rubbery texture.
(d) Unpollinated Dates 
- Dates not pollinated as evidenced by thin flesh,
immature characteristics and no pit in unpitted dates.
(e) Dirt 
- Dates having embedded organic or inorganic material
similar to dirt or sand in character and affecting an
aggregate area greater than that of a circle 3 mm in
diameter.
(f) Insects and mites damage and contamination
- Dates damaged by insects or mites or contaminated by
the presence of dead insects or mites, fragments of
insects or mites or their excreta.
(g) Scouring 
- Breakdown of the sugars into alcohol and acetic acid
by yeasts and bacteria.
(h) Mould
- Presence of mould filaments visible to the naked eye.
(i) Decay
- Dates that area in a state of decomposition and very
objectionable in appearance.
Allowance for Defects
The maximum allowances for the defects shall be:
A total of 7% by count of dates with defects (a)
A total of 6% by count of dates with defects (b), (c) and (d)
A total of 6% by count of dates with defects (e) and (f)
A total of 1% by count of dates with defects (g), (h) and (i)
D. WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Containers shall be as full as practical without impairing
quality and shall be consistent with a proper declaration of
contents for the product.
E. LABELLING
In addition to sections 1, 2, 4 and 6 of the General Standard
for the Labeling of Pre-packaged Foods (Ref. CODEX
STAN. 1-1981), the following specific provisions apply:
• The Name style and variety of the Food
• List of Ingredients
• Net Contents
• Name and Address of the manufacturer, packer,
distributor, importer, exporter or vendor
• Country of Origin
• Lot Identification
• Expiring date
F. METHODS OF SAMPLING AND ANALYSIS
Method of Sampling
Gross Sample
Select at random not less than 2 individual packages per
each 1,000 kg portion of the lot. From each individual
package draw a sample of 300 g, and a gross sample of not
less than 3,000 g. is sufficient. Use the gross sample to
Carefully check for live infestation and general cleanli-
ness of the product prior to its examination for compliance
with other provisions of the standard.
Sub-samples for Examination and Testing
Mix the gross sample well and take small quantities at
random from many different places as follows:
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
138
• For moisture test - 500 gram
• For pits (in pitted style) - 100 dates
• For specified defects and size requirements - 100 dates
F. METHOD OF EXAMINATION
Using a strong light, examine each date carefully for inter-
nal defects. If the dates are pitted, open up the flesh so that
the internal cavity can be viewed. If the dates are unpitted,
slit the date open so as to expose the pit, remove the pit and
examine the pit cavity.
2.10. Pepper
Pepper originates from the Malabar coast of Southern
India, and was spread from there by emigrating Hindus to
Indonesian and Malaysia. Pepper was an important and
popular spice to trade in Oriental countries as early as 2000
years ago. The most popular variety was the long pepper
(Piper longum L.) from Bengal. Pepper was used in Europe
as a spice as early as the Middle Ages.  During the 16th cen-
tury, the Portuguese empire secured a monopoly in trading
the spice that was later broken up by the English and Dutch
imperial powers. At present, only black pepper (Piper nigri-
um) plays an important role in global trading.
2.10.1. Botany
Pepper belongs to the piperaceae family. Among the 700
different varieties there are bushy types, as well as tree-like,
creeping, climbing and epiphytic sorts. Piper nigrum is a
climbing plant that so long as it is not trimmed, can reach
up to 10 m in height. The long stems turn to wood at the bottom,
yet remain green towards the top. The system of shoots is
distinguished by the main shoots that grow upwards, and
the lateral, fruit-bearing  shoots that grow horizontally. The
main shoots form numerous nodes on which adventitious
roots grow for climbing, as well as lateral shoots and the
stemmed, heart-shaped leaves and blossom ears. 
The different varieties range from single-sexed to her-
maphrodite and are self-pollinating. Their syncarpy, which is up
to 15 cm long produces berry-like fruits (bot. drupes). These
take around 6-8 months to develop from blossom to ripe fruit.
2.10.2. Varieties and Countries 
of Origin
Only the following selection of pepper varieties is of
any importance as a spice amongst the 700 or so varieties:
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
139
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Fresh and dried dates
< Black pepper (Piper nigrum) from India, Malaysia and
Indonesia,
< Bengal pepper (Piper longum L.) from the mountains
of the lower Himalayas,
< Java pepper (Piper retrofractum Vahl) from Malaysia
and Indonesia,
< Ashanti pepper (Piper guineense Schum. et Thonn)
from tropical Africa, and 
< Kubeben pepper (Piper cubeba L.f.) which grows in
Indonesia and Malaysia.
Other spices termed “pepper” – such as red pepper, Jamaica
pepper, Melegueta pepper (grains of paradise/Guinea
grains) and the seeds of the pepper tree (Schinus molle L) -
that grows - in California and Chile – have only begun to be
termed pepper due to their peppery aroma. Nonetheless,
they do not belong to the piperaceae family.
Black pepper is processed and traded in a number of dif-
ferent ways, and there are many local varieties. Nevertheless,
two main groups can be distinguished:
< Pepper Varieties with Large Leaves
They have large syncarpy with small fruits. These include
the very productive varieties “Balamacotta” from India,
“Kuching” from Malaysia – which is very susceptible to
stalk rot – and “Belantung” from Indonesia.
< Pepper Varieties with Small Leaves
Produce smaller syncarpies with larger single fruits that
are more resistant against diseases and not as demanding.
The most prominent varieties include “Kalluvalli” from
India (relatively resistant to drought), “Cheriakaedan”
(Highly resistant to stalk rot), “Bangka” from Indonesia
and many more.
Currently, the largest producers of black pepper are still
India, followed by Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and Sri
Lanka. In Latin America, Brazil, followed by Mexico, are
the two largest producers.
Organically grown pepper comes mostly from India,
Madagascar, Tanzania and Sri Lanka.
2.10.3. Uses and Contents
Pepper is one of the oldest classic spices, and is an ingredient
in many spice mixtures (e.g. curry). Black, white and green
pepper all come from the same plant (Piper nigrum), and
are the result of harvesting at different stages of ripeness
and the different processing techniques used (compare 3.1). 
Pepper seeds contain 1-2.5% essential oil, 5-9% piperine,
1% chavicine, 8% piperidine, 6-8% fatty oils, 0,5% resin,
22-42% starch and 8-13% water. The alkaloid piperine is
responsible for the sharp taste. 
2.10.4. Aspects of Plant Cultivation
During the boom-years of cultivation pepper, cultivation
areas (especially in rainforests) were eroded in all of the
producing countries to establish pepper plantations. As a
rule, monoculture supported by wooden stakes were set up
instead of using living tutors. At first, pepper grew rela-
tively well. However, the lack of additional vegetation soon
had an adverse effect, as the mineralization of the soil’s
organic substance took its toll on the yield. Attempts were
made to combat the upsurge in diseases and nutrient
problems with intensive utilization of fungicides and
mineral fertilizers. On many plantations, though, these
measures proved to be economically unprofitable, and the
sites were abandoned. 
Site Requirements
Pepper originates from the tropical, warm, humid latitudes
where temperatures of 25°C and 2.000-4.000 mm annual
rainfall predominate. The plant places heavy demands on
the soil. The best types are nutrient-rich, well-drained
alluvial soils, or volcanic soils with a high organic material
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
140
content. Pepper plants grow frequently in young second-
ary forests (where new trees grow in clearings and on the
forest’s edge), where they grow up to the lower part of the
middle storey. 
The plant may reach 20 years old in a crop (and
sometimes even 40). This is significantly shortened on
conventional plantations (e.g. cultivation at wooden
stakes). The pepper’s natural sites indicate the requirements
the plant has in order to achieve and maintain an organic
production site. One of these elements is dynamic additional
vegetation, as they naturally often occur in secondary
forests – along with suitable tutors.
Seeds
The following methods of producing seeds should be
considered:
Propagation Using Seeds
Propagation by seed is out of the question on conventional
plantations, as germination and the raising of young plants
takes too long. In addition, in the case of pepper, sexual
propagation causes a genetic splitting, which can also lead
to plants with separated sexes being produced (male and
female separate). 
Seeds are won by soaking fully-ripened berries in water
for 2-3 days, then removing the meat and drying them in the
shade. Afterwards, they are planted out in moist, shaded
beds filled with a mixture of humus and lots of sand, at a
distance of one hand-width apart. They will begin to
germinate after 30 days, and can be transplanted to their
f inal sites after a further 6 months – when they have
produced 4 leaves. 
Propagation Using Cuttings
The most widely spread form of propagation is with the
use of cuttings. They should be selected from the terminal
area of the main shoot of a strong, healthy and highly-
productive parent plant. Before the shoot is cut from the
main shoot, the vegetation apex, as well as the leaves and
lateral shoots from the 3rd to the 7th knots, should be
removed. As soon as the plant’s apex has regenerated, the
shoot underneath the 7th knot is removed and planted in a
seedling bed. The seedlings should be set in the soil at and
angle of 45° with 3-4 knots. The uppermost leaves on the
shoot can be left. 
The shoots’ bed must be kept moist and shaded. The
shoots will have taken root after 2 months, whereby only a
30 % rate of success should be expected. They can then be
planted at their final sites.
Rooted Pepper Cuttings 
Another method of producing plants is to use root cuttings
whereby the shoots are directly attached to the plant itself.
The shoots are prepared in the same way as described
above. Yet instead of cutting the shoot off, a layer of moist
moss or humus is bound around the 7th knot, and secured
with plastic foil at both ends. After approximately
2 months, the shoot is cut away and allowed to acclima-
tize in a polyethylene bag in the planting bed before being
transplanted to its final site. Although a higher percentage
of shoots take root then with cuttings, this method
involves more work. 
2.10.5. Planting Methods
On traditional cultivations, living tutors are used for the
pepper plants, and the crop integrated into diversified
agro forestry systems. This should also be the basis of
production in an organic cultivation system. The use of
wooden, or even concrete, posts on such plantations is
unacceptable. The eco-physiological requirements of
pepper can provide tips on how to integrate them
within diverse agro forestry systems, such as have
already been described for, e.g. cacao, bananas, papaya
and vanilla. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
141
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
2.10.6. Diversification Strategies
Pepper can be integrated within a variety of mixed cultivation
systems that have been established at humid, tropical sites,
and which have already been described in the appropriate
chapters on e.g. cacao, mango, banana, papaya and
coconut. Yet as is the case for the cultivation of vanilla,
before planting of pepper plants can begin, the additional
vegetation must already be established.
Plants that can serve as tutors include Jackfruit
(Artocarpus heterophyllus Lam); Kapok (Ceiba ssp.);
Erythrina ssp; Betel nut palms (Areca catechu L.), Gliricidia
sepium, Garuga pinnata, Spondias mangifera and Grevillea
robusta. On young plantations, plants which are suitable for
use as ground coverers include Calopogonium mucunoides,
Arachi pintoi, Canavalia ensiformis and many more.
The tutors are planted on small earth mounds 15 cm
high with a diameter of 50 cm that should be constructed
out of layers of organic material taken from the plantation.
The planting density can be around 600 and 1200 pepper
plants/ha. A stick should be provided as support for the
plant until it is tall enough to reach the tutor plant.
2.10.7. Nutrients and Organic
Fertilization Management
On traditional pepper cultivations, the plants will produce
around 2 kg of green peppercorns per year. On intensively
cultivated conventional plantations, this can be increased to
a yield of around 10 kg between the 5th –7th  years.
However, the life-span of conventional cultivation systems
is significantly shorter.
In order to be able to satisfy the high nutrient demand of
pepper in organic cultivation systems, it is necessary to
concentrate on achieving a high level of organic material
production. It is nonetheless important that the organic
material stems from a diversified supply of support vegeta-
tion. Organic mulch material should always be produced on
the plantation itself, as this is the surest way of maintain-
ing the plantation’s long-term viability, and of keeping
production costs economical.
Green manure produced from the bio-mass within the
system will be sufficient. As long as the system is still
relatively open during its early phases, the species referred
to above can be planted as bottom crops. A large amount of
bio-mass can be produced in a relatively short time by
planting seedlings of the rapid-growing common mallow
(Malvaviscus aroreus). Regular trimming will produce
valuable foliage material with a very narrow C:N ratio. The
mulberry tree (Morus alba) is also very useful as a green
fertilizer. They can easily be raised from seedlings, and also
be planted quite close together (1 x 0.5 m).
2.10.8. Biological Methods of Plant
Protection
In the cases of demanding cultures such as pepper, a
production system that is not suited to the crop will very
quickly lead to phytosanitary problems. During the past few
years, different fungi strains have led to heavy fluctuations
in production in Brazil, and to the loss of large cultivation
areas in Malaysia. In conventional cultivation systems, the
chemical methods of control with fungicide sprays used
(benomyl, benlate, copper chloride) have either proven to
be useless or uneconomical.
The following measures can be taken to prevent and
regulate infestations of pests and diseases on organic
systems of pepper cultivation:
< Choice of site (no water-logging, lots of organic material)
< Establishment of a diversified mixed cultivation 
system
< Continuing production of a large amount of bio-mass
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
142
< Only plant the pepper after the tutors and additional
vegetation have become established, and enough 
distance between the plants has been adhered to
< Removal of diseased plant material
< Management of light/shade, and enrichment of organic
material with tree pruning
< Constant renewal of the site (compare. 2.10.7.)
< Lignin-rich mulch material will stimulate the 
actinomycetes in the soil, which in turn are antagonists
of fusarium
Diseases
Soil-borne fungi are the most important cause of disease in
peppers. They possess a wide spectrum of hosts, and can
affect practically all of the crop types.
Pests
Nematode infestation by Meloidogyne spp. causes the main
problem on conventional pepper cultivations. Greater damage,
especially in Indonesia, is caused by various bugs; scales
and green flies, beetles, as well as butterfly caterpillars. 
If the plantations are situated near houses, then free-
roaming pigs and chickens will often cause considerable
damage to the plants. These animals must be kept off of the
plantations.
2.10.9. Crop Monitoring and
Maintenance
This sensitive crop requires special care of the soil as the
surface roots can make this type of work more difficult.
During harvesting, the ground beneath the plants must be
kept clean, in order to be able to collect any ripe berries that
have fallen. Careful maintenance is essential for a reasonable
yield. Vines must be regularly tied back and pruned, and
diseased or withered plants replaced.
New Plantations
Young pepper plantations form blossoms within the first
year. However, it is recommendable to remove these during
the first two years in order to avoid inhibiting vegetative
growth. The main shoots must be attached to the tutor.
To stimulate growth of the main shoot and lateral
shoots, shoots should be regularly pruned during the first
few years. Pepper plants generally grow three shoots. After
the main shoot has developed 8-10 internodes, it should
be pruned back to 2-3. As soon as the other shoots have
developed 8-10 internodes, then these are pruned as well.
Every time 8-10 internodes have developed, the same
process should be repeated. After 7-8 prunings, the tree
will have reached a height of around 3 m. This height
should now be maintained by regularly cutting off the
apex shoots.
Established Crops
After the production phase has begun, maintenance is
limited to pruning of the additional vegetation and tutors.
The system is thereby continually renewed, and sufficient
mulch material produced. Flowering herbs, grasses or
Cyperaceaen are removed with a bush knife. 
The additional vegetation and tutors should be pruned
during the season with least sunshine before they begin to
fructify. In particular, those species of trees included in the
secondary forest system that are not deciduous (these
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
143
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 33: 
The Most Important Diseases in Pepper
Cultivation
Germ Symptoms Appearance
Phytophtera palmivora Leaf wilt, yellow discoloring In all producing countries,   
(pepper wilt) with loss of leaves, shoots especially in Asia 
and finally, entire plant.
Fusarium solani ditto. Latin America
var. Piperi (root rot)
Ganoderma lucidum ditto. World-wide  
(red root rot)
Colletotrichum; Leaf flecks World-wide 
Rhizoctonia
Pseudomonas (Bacteria) Leaf flecks World-wide
include most of the species recommended as tutors), must
be pruned. The trees in the upper reaches of the primary
forest do not usually need to be pruned. 
The resulting branch material should be chopped up and
spread around the ground as a mulch layer. In addition to
regulating lighting conditions on the plantation, pruning
measures also provide a continual source of organic material
and a sufficiently thick layer of mulch.
2.10.10.Harvesting and Post-harvest
Treatment
The following types of pepper result from different
harvesting times and processing methods
Black pepper
The half-ripe berries are harvested when they have attained
their final size. On small farms, these are then laid out on
mats or concrete areas to dry out in the sun – whereby they
take on their typical dark brown color. 
White pepper
White pepper is produced by cutting down the ripened red
berries from the syncarpy. The correct time for harvesting
is crucial, as over-ripe berries will fall to the ground of their
own accord. 
Green pepper
In order to manufacture green pepper, immediately after the
harvest the berries is separated from the syncarpy, washed
and conserved in brine (salt water, vinegar20, citric acid). 
20 Vinegar from certified organic production.
2.10.11.Product Specifications and
Quality Standards
White and Black Pepper
Preparation
Black and white pepper are both traded as whole corns, or
fine/coarsely ground.
The following is a systematic description of the steps
necessary to manufacture white and black pepper.
FLOW-CHART OF THE MANUFACTURE OF WHITE
AND BLACK PEPPER
Manufacturing White Pepper
In order to manufacture white pepper, the berries are picked
when fully ripened, when they take on a yellow-red color.
Firstly, the berries are separated from the ears and foreign
particles, and then placed in sacks lying in cold, flowing
water, in order to be ‘water-roasted’. They need to remain
there until the fruit meat can be removed from the seeds,
which usually takes between a week and ten days. Sacks are
removed from the water, and the meat separated by treading
on the sacks or rubbing them. Then, the corns are washed
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
144
White pepper
Harvest 
(ripe, red berries)
Separation of berries 
and sorting
Water roasting 
(covered with water)
Separation of meat
Washing
Drying
Sorting and packing 
Black pepper
Harvest 
(half-ripe, green berries)
Soaking in boiling water
Drying
Removal of stems
Sorting and packing 
carefully again in water to remove residues of meat, dirt and
slime. The remaining gray corns are then laid out on flat
areas to dry in the sun for several days until they have
turned yellow-white. Before they are packed, the dried pepper
corns are sorted through again to remove any damaged corns.
The sun-bleached white pepper corns are round, with a
smooth surface, somewhat flattened at the poles, and are
about 2-4 mm in diameter. The drying process causes a loss
of weight, meaning that only a yield of 28 % can be expected
when processing fresh berries into white pepper. 
Manufacturing Black Pepper
In order to manufacture black pepper, the berries are picked
when half-ripened, when the lower berries on the panicle
begin to turn red. Occasionally, the panicles are placed
briefly in boiling water in order to cleanse them. The harvest
is then spread out in the sun to dry, either still on the panicle
or as separated berries. Before they are packed, the pepper
corns might be de-stalked and have any foreign particles or
damaged corns removed (stones, stems).
The drying process leaves the corns looking shriveled
and dark brown, with a diameter of 3-6 mm. The process
causes weight loss, meaning that only a yield of 32 % can be
expected when processing fresh berries into black pepper.
Manufacturing Green Pepper
The fully-developed, green berries are removed from the
rachis and immediately immersed in brine. In this way, the oxi-
dation process, which causes the brown coloring, is prevented,
and the berries become soft. The pepper’s aroma substances
remain entirely intact. The corns taste highly aromatic, yet not
as spicy as black or white pepper. Because of their softer con-
sistency, green pepper corns are easier to incorporate in meals,
and can be eaten immediately without needing to be crushed.
White, Black and green pepper may not be treated with
methyl bromide or ethylene oxide, or irradiated with ionizing
rays.
Quality Requirements
The following is a list of quality characteristics with mini-
mum and maximum values for white and black pepper
corns that are usually required officially or by importers.
Different minimum and maximum values can be agreed
upon between importers and exporters, providing these do
not clash with official regulations.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
145
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 34: 
Quality Characteristics with Minimum 
and Maximum Values for White and Black
Pepper Corns
Quality Characteristics Minimum and Maximum Values
Smell aromatic not musty
Taste Variety-specific, very spicy
Purity Free of foreign matter, i.e. sand, stones, 
plant parts, insects etc.
Water content max. 10-12 %
Essential oil (whole white pepper) min. 1.0 %
Essential oil (whole black pepper) min. 1.2 %
Piperine (whole white and Black pepper) min. 3.5 %
Ash (whole black pepper) max. 7.0 %
Ash (whole white pepper) max. 3.0 %
Ash soluble in hydrochloric acid max. 1.0 % 
(white pepper)
Ash soluble in hydrochloric acid max. 2,0 % 
(black pepper)
RESIDUES
Pesticides Not measurable
Bromide and ethylene oxide Not measurable
MYCOTOXINS
Aflatoxin B1 max. 2 µg/kg
Total aflatoxins B1, B2, G1, G2 max. 4 µg/kg
MICRO-ORGANISMS
Mould fungi max. 100,000/g
Escherichia coli max. 10,000/g
Bacillus cereus max. 10,000/g
Sulphite-reducing clostridium max. 10,000/g
Staphylococcus aureus max. 100/g
Salmonella Not measurable in 20 g
In order that the quality requirements are upheld, and no
contamination of the pepper corns occurs, preparation
should take place under clean, hygienic and ideal conditions.
The following aspects should be adhered to:
< Equipment (tubs, knives etc.), as well as working and
drying surfaces (racks, mats etc.) and preparing and
storage rooms, should be cleaned regularly.
< Personnel should be healthy, and be able to wash
themselves, or at least their hands (washrooms,
toilets), and wear clean, washable garments.
< Water used for cleansing purposes must be free from
feces and other contaminants.
< Animals or animal feces must not come into contact
with the product.
Packaging and Storage
Bulk Packaging 
Pepper corns intended for export to Europe are usually
packed in bulk in shrink-packaging made out of
steam-impermeable, saleable foils (e.g. polyethylene,
polypropylene). Before the bags sealed, nitrogen can be
added as an inert gas. 
Details of the total weight in grams. The numbers
describing the weight of the contents must be of the
following size:  
< Best before date 
The ‘Best before ...’ details must include day, month and
year; e.g.. best before 30.11.2001
< Batch number
Consumer Packages
If the pepper corns are not to be packaged in bulk con-
tainers in the country of origin, but sealed in consumer
packages, then this packaging should fulfill the following
functions:
< Protect the pepper corns from loss of aroma and
against undesirable smells and tastes from its 
surroundings (aroma protection).
< Protect the contents against damaging.
< Offer sufficient conservation properties, especially
against loss or gain of moisture.
< Provide a surface area for advertising and product
information.
< Be easy to open and re-seal, so that the remaining 
pepper remains fresh.
The following materials can be used as product packaging:
< Glass jars with screwable lid 
< Specially-covered paper bags 
< Single-layer plastic bags (polyethylene or 
polypropylene)
Storage
Packaged pepper should be stored in a dark place at tem-
peratures up to 15-20°C (optimum: 5°C) and a maximum
relative humidity of 60°C. At higher relative humidity,
mould and aflatoxins may grow. Under optimum storage
conditions, pepper can be stored for between 12 and 18
months. 
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
146
Table 35: 
Numbers Describing the Weight of the Contents
Must be of the Following Sizes
Weight of contents Letter size
Less than 50 g 2 mm
More than 50 g to 200 g 3 mm
More than 200 g to 1000 g 4 mm
More than 1000 g 6 mm
2.11. Different Possible Processing
Methods for Fruits
2.11.1 Dried Fruits
Drying is the oldest method of making food storable for
longer periods. It is based on the fact that micro-organisms
tend to cease growing below a certain level of water content.
During drying, it is important to extract the water from the
fruit as carefully as possible. The most important features
are good air circulation and not too high temperatures
FLOW-CHART FOR THE PREPARATION OF DRIED
FRUIT FROM FRESH FRUITS 
Fruit
Sorting
Washing
Peeling
Pulping
Drying
Sorting and packaging
Labeling and storing
Sorting
After harvesting, the fruits are sorted as only fresh, unripe
and not fermented fruits can be used for drying.
Washing and Peeling
The fruits must be washed very carefully in order not to
damage them. Afterwards, inedible parts such as leaves,
seeds, pips, heartwood and skins are removed.
Pulping and Drying the Fruits
The fruits are now cut into same-sized pieces, and laid out to
dry in the air and sun in thin layers on racks, in solar dryers
(drying tunnels) or drying ovens (artificial drying at 70°C).
Sorting and Packaging
Before they are packed, the fruits are inspected and sorted
again to rid them of discolored, skin remnants and seeds etc...
Labeling and Storage
The packaged fruits can now be labeled and stored prior to
being shipped.
During and after drying, the dried fruits may not be treated
with methyl bromide, ethylene oxide, sulphur oxides or
ionizing radiation.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
147
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Preparation of mangos for the drying process. 
(Picture: Claro AG)
Quality Requirements
The following is a list of quality characteristics that are usual-
ly required officially or by importers with minimum and
maximum values for dried fruits. Different minimum and
maximum values can be agreed between importers and
exporters, providing these do not clash with off icial
regulations.
In order that the quality requirements are upheld, and no
contamination of the fruits occurs, preparation should take
place under clean, hygienic and ideal conditions. The
following aspects should be adhered to:
• Equipment (tubs, knives etc.), as well as working and
drying surfaces (racks, mats etc.) and preparing and
storage rooms, should be cleaned regularly.
• Personnel should be healthy, and be able to wash them-
selves, or at least their hands (washrooms, toilets) and
wear clean, washable garments.
• Water used for cleansing purposes must be free from
feces and other contaminants.
• Animals or animal feces must not come into contact
with the fruits. If the fruits are to be dried in the open,
then fences must be erected to guard the racks against
birds and nearby animals.
Packaging and Storage
Details Given on Packaging
The label on the jar must display the following:
< Packaging types and material
In order to be exported to Europe, the dried fruits can be
packed in consumer packs, or wholesaler packs (bulk)
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
148
Table 36: 
Quality Characteristics with Minimum and
Maximum Values for Dried Fruits
Quality Characteristics Minimum and Maximum Values
Taste and smell Variety-specific, aromatic, fresh, not moldy
Cleanliness Free from foreign particles, such as insects, 
sand, small stones etc.
Water content max. 18 %
aw-value 0.55 to 0.65 (at 20 °C)
RESIDUES
Pesticides Not measurable
Sulphur oxide Not measurable
Bromide and ethylene oxide Not measurable
MICRO-ORGANISMS
Total number of parts max. 10,000/g 
Yeasts max. 10/g
Mould fungus max. 10/g
Staphylococcus aureus max. 10/g
Coliforms max. 1/g
Escherichia coli Not measurable in 0.01 g
Enterococci Not measurable in 1 g
Salmonella Not measurable in 20 g
MYCOTOXINS
Staphylococcus enterotoxin Not measurable
Aflatoxin B1 max. 2 µg/kg
Total aflatoxins B1, B2, G1, G2 max. 4 µg/kg
Patulin max. 50 µg/kg
HEAVY METALS
Lead (Pb) max. 1.25 mg/kg
Cadmium (Cd) max. 0.125 mg/kg
Mercury (Hg) max. 0.10 mg/kg
Preparation of mangos for further processing. 
(Picture: Claro AG)
in bags made of foils, impermeable to steam (e.g.
polyethylene or polypropylene). Before sealing, a gas
(e.g. nitrogen) may be added (nitrogen flushing). 
< Details given on packaging
If the dried fruits are packed directly for consumers,
then the following details must be included on the
outside of the packets:
< Product name (“trade name”)
The name of the product, e.g. organically grown dried
banana slices21
< Manufacturer
Name and address of the manufacturer, importer, exporter
or trader within the country of origin, and which country.
< List of contents 
A list of ingredients and additions, beginning with the
heaviest proportion of total weight at the time of
packaging.
< Weight
DETAILS OF THE TOTAL PACKED WEIGHT IN GRAM
< Best before date 
The ‘Best before ...’ details must include day, month and
year; e.g.. best before 30.11.2001
< Batch number
21 Organic products must be protected from contamination by non-
compliant substances at each stage in the process, i.e. processing,
packaging, shipping. Therefore, products originating from a certified
organic plantation must be recognisably declared as such.
Function of the Product Packaging
The product packaging should fulfill the following functions:
< Protect it from loss of aroma and against undesirable smells
and tastes from its surroundings (aroma protection).
< Offer sufficient conservation properties, especially
against loss or gain of moisture.
< Protect the contents against damaging.
< Provide a surface area for advertising and product
information.
2.11.2 Fruit Marmalades
Processing
Jams are basically preparations made of fruit (jams) and
various sugars that are made conservable mainly by heat
treatment (boil down). The half-set yet spreadable consistency
of these products is achieved by releasing the pectin found
in the fruit pulp during the boiling process, and using this
together with further pectin added to form a jelly-like mass.
FLOW-CHART FOR THE PREPARATION OF JAM
FROM FRESH FRUITS 
Fruit
Sorting
Washing
Peeling and sorting
Pulping
Addition of sugar
Heating and boiling down
possible addition of pectin, citric acid and spices, 
then renewed heating
filling into jars
vacuum sealing
Pasteurizing
Cooling
Labeling and storing
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
149
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 37: 
Numbers Describing the Weight of the Contents
Must be of the following Sizes
Weight of contents Letter size
Less than 50 g 2 mm
More than 50 g to 200 g 3 mm
More than 200 g to 1000 g 4 mm
More than 1000 g 6 mm
Sorting
After harvesting, the fruits are sorted because only those
that are fresh, ripe and not rotten can be used to make jams.
Jams can also be made from previously prepared frozen
fruits and pulp.
Washing
The fruit should be washed very carefully as it can easily be
damaged.
Peeling and Sorting
This follows the procedure of removing leaves, wooden
pieces, pips or seeds and peel. Peeling is often done manu-
ally, or with knives, yet sometimes the skin is loosened with
steam and then subsequently rubbed away mechanically.
Finally, the fruits are sorted again to remove any blackened
pieces, bits of peeling seeds etc.
Pulping and Adding Sugar
The peeled fruits are then pulped, and sugar added. They
might also be mixed with water or fruit juice. To make jam, at
least 350g fruit per 1000g finished product must be used; to
make jam extra, at least 450g fruit per 1000g finished product
must be used. The sugar must be ecologically grown.
Heating and Boiling
The mixture is now heated to 70-80°C and boiled down,
while constantly being stirred, at 65°C until shortly before
it reaches the desired consistency.
Adding Citric Acid, Pectin and Spices (Optional)
If necessary or desired, citric acid, pectin and spices (from
certified organic production) can be added, and the mixture
again briefly heated to 80°C.
Filling into jars, vacuum-sealing and Pasteurizing
The liquid mass is now poured into jars, vacuum-sealed and
pasteurized.
Cooling, Labeling and Storage
After the heating process, the jams are first cooled to 40°C,
and then subsequently down to storage temperature, are
labeled and finally, stored.
Quality Requirements
In addition to the previously mentioned quality require-
ments, such as clearly defined fruit content, the jams must
also conform to the following specifications. These quality
requirements, with their minimum and maximum values,
are generally issued by the authorities or importers. Yet
agreements may be reached between individual manufac-
turers and importers upon different values, providing they
still conform to official requirements.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
150
Table 38: 
Minimum Fruit Content for the Manufacture 
of Jam
Description Fruit Content During Manufacture
Jam, extra 450 g fruit per 1000 g product
Jam 350 g fruit per 1000 g product
Preparation of mangos for further processing. (Picture: Claro AG)
In order to conform to the quality requirements, and to prevent
the fruit from becoming contaminated, all preparations
must be carried out under clean, hygienic and acceptable
conditions. The following aspects must be heeded:
< Equipment (tubs, knives etc.), as well as working 
surfaces (tables etc.) and preparing and storage rooms,
should be cleaned regularly.
< Personnel should be healthy, be able to wash them-
selves, or at least their hands (washrooms, toilets) and
wear clean, washable over garments.
< Water used for cleansing purposes must be free from
feces and other contaminants.
< Animals or animal feces must not come into contact
with the processed fruits.
22 Compare footnote No. 5 
Packaging and Storage
Packaging Types and Material 
In order to be exported to Europe, the jams are usually
filled into consumer-size jars with twist-off lids.
Details Given on Packaging
The label on the jar must display the following:
< Product name (‘Trade name’)
The name of the product, consisting of: Name of the
fruit with or without the extra description – according
to fruit content; e.g.: Banana jam extra, organically
grown22
< Manufacturer
Name and address of the manufacturer, importer,
exporter or product trader, plus country of origin.
< List of contents 
A list of ingredients and additives in the jam, beginning
with the heaviest proportion of total weight at the time
of packaging
< Details of the total sugar content
Total sugar content per 100 g product (measured refract
metrically at 20 °C) must  be represented with the words
”Total sugar content ....g per 100 g”.
e.g.: Total sugar content 55 g per 100 g.
< Details of fruit content
The fruit content per 100 g product must be given with
the words ”manufactured from....g fruit per 100 g”.
e.g.: manufactured from 45 g fruit per 100 g.
< Notice about cooling
The notice about storing the product in a cool place
must be given with the words:
”After opening, store in a cool place”.
< Weight
Details of the total weight in grams
< Best before date 
The ‘Best before ...’ details must include day, month and
year; e.g.. best before 30.11.2001
< Batch number
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
151
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 39: 
Quality Characteristics with Minimum and
Maximum Values for Jam
Quality Characteristics Minimum and Maximum Values
Smell and taste Variety-specific, aromatic
Cleanliness Free of foreign substances such as peel, 
stalks etc.
Contents of jam extra Min. 450 g per 1000 g product
Contents of jam min. 350 g per 1000 g product
Soluble dry mass in percent 
(measured refractometrically) min. 60 %
MYCOTOXINS
Aflatoxin B1 max. 2 µg/kg
Total aflatoxins B1, B2, G1, G2 max. 4 µg/kg
Patulin max. 50 µg/kg
RESIDUES
Pesticides Not measurable
Sulphur oxide Not measurable
Bromide Not measurable
Ethylene oxide Not measurable
2.11.3. Canned Fruits
Processing
Canned foods are products that can be stored over a long
period in airtight containers (metal or glass jars). They are
preserved mainly by heat treatment, during which the
micro-organisms present in the fruit are significantly
reduced in number, or their development so restricted, that
they are prevented from spoiling the product. 
CHART: FLOW-CHART FOR THE PREPARATION OF
CANNED PRODUCTS FROM FRESH FRUITS
Fruit
Sorting
Washing
Peeling and sorting
Pulping
Filling into jars or cans with syrup
Vacuum sealing
Pasteurizing or sterilizing
Cooling
Labeling and storage
Sorting
After harvesting, the fruits are sorted, because only those
that are fresh, ripe and not rotten can be used to make jams.
Jams can also be made from previously prepared, frozen
fruits and pulp.
Washing
The fruit should be washed very carefully as it can easily be
damaged.
Peeling and Sorting
This follows the procedure of removing leaves, wooden
pieces, pips or seeds and peel. Peeling is often done
manually, or with knives, yet sometimes the skin is loosened
with steam and then subsequently rubbed away mechani-
cally. Finally, the fruits are sorted again to remove any
blackened pieces, bits of peeling seeds etc.
Pulping
The peeled fruit can be cut into a variety of shapes, according
to type (indicated by the crosses table 40). The shape of the
cut fruit must be given on the can (slices, diced, pieces etc.).
Filling in Jars or Cans
The cut pieces are now filled into jars or cans and covered
with syrup. Additional information must be given on the
can according to the sugar content of the syrup.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
152
Table 40:
Different Possible Cut Shapes for Different Fruits
Description Cut shape Pine-apple Mango Papaya Banana
Whole fruit Peeled X
Slices Slices of fruit cut into
approximately the same X X X X  
size
Half slices Uniformly cut, semi-circle X 
shaped slices.
Diced Fruit cut into dice shapes X X X 
of roughly the same size.
Balls Fruit pulp pieces cut into X
roughly ball shapes
Pieces Pieces of fruit cut into X 
irregular shapes
Grated Irregular thin strips and X 
pieces of fruit
Chunks Large regularly cut pieces X 
of pineapple
Titbits Trapeze-shaped segments X 
of pineapple
* The sugar must be organically grown.
If the appropriate fruit juice has been used as syrup then ...
“in natural juice” must be included on the label, e.g.:
Organically grown bananas in natural juice.
Vacuum Sealing, Pasteurizing or Sterilizing
After the jars or cans have been vacuum sealed, they are
either pasteurized (temperatures above 80°C) or sterilized
(temperatures above 100°C).
Cooling
After the heating process, the canned fruits are first
cooled to 40°C, and then brought subsequently down to
storage temperature.
Labeling and Storage
After they have been cooled, the canned fruits are labeled
and stored.
Quality Requirements
In addition to the previously listed quality requirements,
such as clearly defined sugar concentrations of the syrup
and shapes specific to certain fruits, the contents should
also conform to the following characteristics. These quality
requirements, with their minimum and maximum values,
are generally issued by the authorities or importers. Yet
agreements may be reached between individual manufac-
turers and importers upon different values, providing they
still conform to official requirements.
In order to conform to the quality requirements, and to
prevent the fruit becoming contaminated, all preparations
must be carried out under clean, hygienic and acceptable
conditions. The following aspects must be heeded:
< Equipment (tubs, knives etc.), as well as working 
surfaces (tables etc.) and preparing and storage rooms
should be cleaned regularly.
< Personnel should be healthy, be able to wash them-
selves, or at least their hands (washrooms, toilets) and
wear clean, washable garments.
< Water used for cleansing purposes must be free from
feces and other contaminants.
< Animals or animal feces must not come into contact
with the processed fruits.
Packaging and Storage
Packaging Type and Material
For export to Europe, the fruits can be packed into single or
wholesale packages (bulk) made of glass, aluminum or tin
cans.
Details Given on Packaging
The label on the jar must display the following:
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
153
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 41: 
Sugar Concentration of the Syrup Used 
for Canned Fruits
Sugar Concentration* of the Syrup Description on the Can
9-14 % Very lightly sugared
14-17 % Lightly sugared
17-20 % Sugared
over 20 % Strongly sugared
Table 42: 
Quality Characteristics with Minimum and
Maximum Values for Jam
Quality Characteristics Minimum and Maximum Values
Taste and smell Variety-specific, aromatic, not moldy
Cleanliness Free of foreign substances such as peel, 
stalks etc.
MYCOTOXINS
Aflatoxins B1 max. 2 µg/kg
Total aflatoxines B1, B2, G1, G2 max. 4 µg/kg
Patulin max. 50 µg/kg
RESIDUE
Pesticide Not measurable
Sulphur oxide Not measurable
Bromide Not measurable
Ethylene oxide Not measurable
< Product name (‘Trade name’)
The name of the product, consisting of: Name of the
fruit with or without the description extra – according to
fruit content; e.g.: Mangos in slices, lightly sugared,
organically grown23
< Manufacturer
Name and address of the manufacturer, importer,
exporter or product trader, plus    country of origin.
< List of contents 
A list of ingredients and additives in the jam, beginning
with the heaviest proportion of total weight at the time
of packaging
< Weight
Total and dry weight of the fruit
< Best before date 
The ‘Best before ...’ details must include day, month and
year
< Batch number
23 Organic products must be protected from contamination by non-
compliant substances at each stage in the process, i.e. processing,
packaging, shipping. Therefore, products originating from a certified
organic farm must be recognisably declared as such
2.11.4. Fruit Pulp
Processing
Canned foods are products that can be stored over a long
period in airtight containers (metal or glass jars). They are
preserved mainly by heat treatment, during which the
micro-organisms present in the fruit are significantly
reduced in number, or their development so restricted, that
they are prevented from spoiling the product. 
FLOW-CHART FOR THE PREPARATION OF FRUIT
PULP FROM FRESH FRUITS 
Fruit
Sorting
Washing
Peeling and sorting
Pulping and straining
De-aeration (partially)
Pasteurizing or sterilizing
Filling
Cooling, labeling and storage 
Manufacturing Fruit Pulp
In producing pulp, only fresh, ripe fruit should be used that
has not yet turned moldy. The skin of fully ripened fruits is
entirely yellow, and easy to peel from the fruit. After har-
vesting, the fruit are first sorted and washed, before being
peeled by hand and placed directly in a solution of 4% citric
acid and 1% ascorbic acid, to prevent discoloring.
Afterwards, the fruits are placed in a heat exchanger,
where they are heated to a temperature of 93° C in order to
deactivate any enzymes, and to break down the fruit pulp.
The pulp then passes through a two-stage sieve equipped
with a 0.8 mm and a 0.5 mm screen. After de-aeration,
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
154
Table 43: 
Numbers Describing the Weight of the Contents
Must be of the following Sizes
Weight of contents Letter size
Less than 50 g 2 mm
More than 50 g to 200 g 3 mm
More than 200 g to 1000 g 4 mm
More than 1000 g 6 mm
the pulp is homogenized at a pressure of 100-300 bar and
sterilized for 40-45 seconds at 100°C. 
The fruit pulp can now be filled into tin cans whilst still hot,
whereby the cans are sealed while being steamed, the tempera-
ture maintained for 5 min., and then rapidly cooled down. At
temperatures of around 15°C, the pulp can be stored for up to
1 year. After pasteurizing, the pulp can also be cooled down and
filled into polyethylene bags placed in 50-200 kg barrels. It is
then rapidly frozen, and can be stored at -18°C for 18 months.
Pulp which has been filled under antiseptic conditions (bag-in-
box) can be stored for up to 1 year at room temperature.
Quality Requirements
These quality requirements, with their minimum and
maximum values, are generally issued by the authorities or
importers. Yet agreements may be reached between individual
manufacturers and importers upon different values, providing
they still conform to official requirements. 
24 A Brix value is the measure of the concentration of sugars, acids, and
other identifying compounds in a juice. Every fruit juice has a slightly
different Brix value.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
155
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Preparation of mangos for further processing. (Picture: Claro AG)
Table 44: 
Quality Characteristics with Minimum and
Maximum Values for Fruit Pulp
Quality Requirements Minimum and Maximum Values
Smell and taste Variety-specific, aromatic
Cleanliness Free of foreign substances such as peel, 
stalks etc.
Relative density (20/20) for pineapple juice min 1.045
Brix value24 for pineapple juice min 11.2 %
Relative density (20/20) for Banana pulp min 1.083
Brix value for Banana pulp min 20.0 %
Relative density (20/20) for Mango pulp min 1.057
Brix value for Mango pulp min 14.0 %
Ethanol max 3.0 g/kg
Volatile acids, evaluated as acetic acid max 0.4 g/kg
Lactic acid max 0.5 g/kg
D-Malic acid Not measurable
Sulphuric acid Not measurable
Hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) max 20 mg/kg
HEAVY METALS
Arsenic (As) max 0.1 mg/kg
Lead (Pb) max 0.2 mg/kg
Copper (Cu) max 5.0 mg/kg
Zinc (Zn) max 5.0 mg/kg
Iron (Fe) max 5.0 mg/kg
Tin (Sn) max 1.0 mg/kg
Mercury (Hg) max 0.01 mg/kg
Cadmium (Cd) max 0.02 mg/kg
RESIDUES
Pesticide Not measurable
Sulphur oxide Not measurable
Bromide Not measurable
Ethylene oxide Not measurable
MYCOTOXINS
Aflatoxin B1 max 2 µg/kg
Total aflatoxins B1, B2, G1, G2 max 4 µg/kg
Patulin max 50 µg/kg
In order to conform to the quality requirements, and to prevent
the fruit from becoming contaminated, all preparations
must be carried out under clean, hygienic and acceptable
conditions. The following aspects must be heeded:
< Equipment (tubs, knives etc.), as well as working 
surfaces (tables etc.) and preparing and storage rooms
should be cleaned regularly.
< Personnel should be healthy, and have the possibility
to wash themselves, or at least their hands (wash-
rooms, toilets) and wear clean, washable over garments.
< Water used for cleansing purposes must be free from
faces and other contaminants.
< Animals or animal faces must not come into contact
with the processed fruits.
Packaging and Storage
Packaging Type and Material
In order to be exported to Europe, the pulp/juices can be
packed into single or wholesale packages (bulk) consisting
of glass jars, tin cans or polyethylene or polypropylene
bags, and also filled antiseptically into ‘bag-in-boxes’.
Storage
Pasteurized pineapple juice, as well as pasteurized banana,
mango and papaya pulp can be stored as follows: 
2.11.5. Transport Packaging
A form of transport packaging is required to ship the sales
packages, the bulk or singly packed fruits. In choosing
them, the following aspects should be heeded:
• Transport packaging made, for example, out of card-
board, should be strong enough to protect the contents
against being damaged by outside pressure. 
• The packaging should be dimensioned to allow the
contents to be held firmly, but not too tightly in place.
• The dimensions should be compatible with standard
pallet and container dimensions.
Information Printed on Transport Packaging
The transport packaging should display details of the
following:
< Name and address of the manufacturer/packer and
country of origin
< Description of the product and its quality class
< Year harvested
< Net weight, number
< Batch number
< Destination, with the trader’s/importer’s address
< Visible notice of the organic nature of the product25
25 When products from organic plantations are being labelled as such, it
is necessary to adhere to the requisite government regulations of the
importing country. Information concerning this is available from the
appropriate certification body. The regulation for organic agriculture
(EEC) 2092/91 is applicable to organic products being imported into
Europe.
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
156
Table 45: 
Storage Conditions and Packing Material 
for Fruit Pulp
Packaging material/ Pineapple- Banana- Mango- Papaya-
storage temperature juice pulp pulp pulp
Tin cans/glass jars 1 year 1 year 1 year 9-12 months
storage temperature below 
15°C
Polyethylene bags/ – 18 months 18 months 12 months
Deep frozen at -18°C
Filled antiseptically, 1 year 1 year 1 year 6-9 months 
bag-in-box/ 
Room temperature
Details given on packaging; The label on the jar must display
the following:
< Product name (‘Trade name’)
< The name of the product, e.g.: Organic banana pulp26
< Manufacturer
< Name and address of the manufacturer, importer,
exporter or product trader, plus country of origin.
< List of contents 
< A list of ingredients and additives, beginning with 
the heaviest proportion of total weight at the time of
packaging, e.g.: bananas, citric acid…
< Weight
< Total weight
< Best before date 
The ‘Best before ...’ details must include day, month and
year; e.g.. best before 30.11.2001
< Batch number
Storage
• The dried fruits should be stored in dark areas at low
temperatures and relative humidity. 
• Under optimum conditions, dried fruits can be stored
for up to 1 year.
If the organic product is being stored in a single warehouse
together with conventional fruits mixing of the different
qualities must be avoided. This is best achieved using the
following methods:
Training and Informing of Warehouse Personnel
• Explicit signs in the warehouse (silos, pallets, tanks
etc.)
• Color differentiation (e.g. green for the organic
product)
• Incoming/dispatched goods separately documented
(warehouse logbook)
It is prohibited to carry out chemical storage measures
(e.g. gassing with methyl bromide) in mixed storage
spaces. Wherever possible, storing both organic and
conventional products together in the same warehouse
should be avoided.
26 Organic products must be protected from contamination by non-
compliant substances at each stage in the process, i.e. processing,
packaging, shipping. Therefore, products originating from a certified
organic farm must be recognisably declared as such
O r g a n i c  F r u i t s
157
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 43: 
Numbers Describing the Weight of the Contents
Must be of the following Sizes
Weight of contents Letter size
Less than 50 g 2 mm
More than 50 g to 200 g 3 mm
More than 200 g to 1000 g 4 mm
More than 1000 g 6 mm
Processed Fruits
Organic Vegetables
3 
In the tropics and subtropics conventional intensive veg-
etable production is characterized by extremely high input
of pesticides and fertilizers. Some of these pesticides, even
if they are no longer allowed because of high health risk and
environmental damage, are still sold to the producers.
Intensive vegetable production in the tropics and subtropics
in many cases does not apply wide crop rotations and large
regions are specialized only in a few vegetables. 
Intensive conventional vegetable production is also
characterized for the extensive use of labor. In many coun-
tries, whole families are involved in this work; in some
cases, even children have to work (e.g. production of
tomatoes, chili, aubergines or egg plants etc. in Mexico).
Families offering their labor power also  migrate across
the country.
What are the Consequences of Intensive Conventional
Vegetable Production? 
Single-crop production leads to an over-exploitation of the
land and increasing pest and disease pressure. Intensive use
of pesticides and fertilizers contaminates water, air and
soil. After cultivating the same crop year after year on the
same land, the insects and diseases become resistant to the
common pesticides; therefore, farmers become dependent
on costly external inputs, and even then farmers suffer yield
depressions due to loss of soil-fertility. This mechanism has
caused farmers from an entire region to shift to different
crops or give up their production. Furthermore, growers
have suffered health problems due to contamination by
agro-chemicals.
What Alternatives Offers Organic Vegetable
Production?
Organic vegetable production has gained  major impor-
tance in many countries, because in vegetables pesticide
application is much more “visible” and closer to the final
consumer than, for example, cereals or any other agricultural
product that receives important post-harvest treatments and
further processing. This is the reason why organic vegetables
in many countries are the first products demanded by the
consumers. Producers, processors and traders recognized
this opportunity and started programs of fresh and
processed organic vegetables. Today, organic vegetables are
the most important items in the organic food assortment. In
some European countries, organic vegetables have a market
share of more than 20% of total vegetable sales. 
In tropical and subtropical countries, national markets
for organic vegetables products have been developed very
slowly or do not exist at the moment. Therefore, organic
vegetable production is still mainly destined for the
export. However, in countries like Brazil, Argentina and
China, many consumers are more and more interested in
healthy food and local retailers are starting to sell organic
vegetables. 
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
158
NGO’s, governmental institutions and traders initially
started to promote the conventional production of vegeta-
bles for self consumption by small farmers in tropical and
subtropical areas. This promotion was aimed at resolving
the lack of vitamins and minerals in the rural population.
Since the 90s, an increasing demand for off-season organic
vegetables has led to export programs of organic vegetables
from the tropics and subtropics. The sale of organic veg-
etable products has offered farmers additional income and
higher prices. Currently, the producer prices for organic
vegetables are 10 to 100% higher compared to prices for
conventional vegetables. However, it is important to recall
that for organic vegetables in particular, additional labor,
often hand-work, is required. This considerably increases
production costs.
Nowadays, many small farmer organizations commer-
cialize their surplus of organic products in the national and
particularly on the export markets. Step by step, large farmers
in the tropics and subtropics have also started to produce
organic vegetables in order to provide fresh and processed
organic vegetables to the export markets.  
General Aspects of Organic Vegetable Production in
the Tropics and Subtropics
Organic vegetable production in the tropics and subtropics
requires flexibility and the application of new technologies
from the producers. In addition to the general challenges
related to vegetable production, farmers in tropical and
subtropical regions are confronted with the following
production constrains:
< Poor soils with low content of organic matter;
< Climatic stress (floods, cyclones, drought);
< Lack of locally adapted production technologies and
slow technology transfer;
< Lack of locally adapted varieties and good quality 
of seeds;
< Fast development of pest and disease infestations;
< High post harvest losses;
< Lack of adequate logistic and marketing facilities;
Organic agriculture is a great alternative for vegetable
growers in the tropics and subtropics. However, organic
vegetable production is differentiated from conventional
vegetable production through a higher production risk,
possible lower yields, introduction of new management
strategies and higher labor cost. The following aspects
have to be considered before starting organic vegetable
production:
a) Seed and Seedlings
Whether seeds or seedlings are bought or produced by the
grower, organic seed/seedlings must be of high quality
because  poor quality material (infested seed and plants
with disease, weak growing plants, etc.) in the initial stages
of organic production reduces the success of the whole
operation. The seed and seedlings must be from organic
origins. If there is no seed of organic quality, producers may
use conventional seeds, but only if they are not treated with
fungicides or insecticides. In this case, the farmer has to
prove that in his region no organic seed and plant material
is available. Furthermore, the conventional seed and all
plant material should not be of genetically modified origin. 
If the producer decides to produce its own
seeds/seedlings, he first has to select the healthiest plants
and vegetable fruit. From fruit vegetables and seed vegeta-
bles early plants must be selected, and from leaf vegetables
late plants. Leaf vegetables are plants that produce many
leaves before flowering. 
1. Fruit vegetables (legumes, maize, zucchini, and most
leaf vegetables) should be harvest when fully ripened.
The pods or ears can be dried directly in the sun. The
seeds have to removed by hand or by threshing.
2. Vegetables with fruits not rich in water (chili, melon,
eggplant etc.) should be harvested when the fruits are
very ripe. Cut the fruit in half, wash the seeds in water
and then put them in the sun to dry.
3. Vegetables with fruits rich in water (tomato, cucumber)
should be treated as follows: the mashed fruits should
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
159
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
put in a pot or container with water for a few hours. The
pulp will float to the top and the seed will sink to the
bottom. The seeds must be put in the sun to dry.
It is important that seed be well dried for storage in a cool,
dark and dry place.  
For the own growth of seeds it is recommendable  to use
own substrate material (compost and soil mixture). This
measure avoids the introduction of contaminated material
into the farm (e.g. pesticides residues, diseases, pest and
weeds). The compost covers the need of nutrients as potas-
sium, phosphorus, magnesia, calcium and trace elements.
For vegetables with a long seedling period or high nitrogen
demand (as celery, leek, cauliflower, broccoli) organic
nitrogen fertilization with e.g. corn powder, liquid manure
or vinasse is needed. 
b) Organic Vegetable Production Systems
In the tropics and subtropics, different vegetable cropping
systems with different needs of nutrients and diverse soil-
plant-relationships are applied. Some examples are the
following:
< Crop rotation system;
< Intercropping system;
< Agroforestry system.
The crop rotation system includes different crops that
are grown at the same time but on different plots (planed
sequences of crops for each season). In a rotational cropping
system, the incorporation of different crops is possible
(legumes crops; groundnuts, grassland or legumes cover
crops; as Crotolaria) for improving soil fertility, accumu-
lating nitrogen, reducing weeds, pest and diseases. An
example of a crop rotation in the tropics: crotolaria,
sorghum, groundnuts, vegetables, maize interplanted
with cowpeas. The overall goal of this crop rotation is to
build up soil. 
Objectives of crop rotations in organic vegetable production:
1. Maintain and enhance soil fertility and structure
through use of different soil zones by different plant
roots; 
2. Import of nutrients through green manuering;
3. Set up a logical sequence of crops: 1. green manure; 
2. heavy feeders; 3. medium feeders; 4. low feeders; 
4. 3-5 year breaks between two crops in order to prevent
pests and diseases.
Intercropping system involves growing different crops
on the same piece of land at the same time. The intercropping
systems allows a more efficient use of the agroecological
system: crops use the water, light and soil nutrients at
different levels under and above the ground. Furthermore,
the diversity of crops reduces the risk of a mass infection by
pests or diseases. A typical example in the subtropics is the
intercropping of maize, beans and zucchini. Important is
the combination of varieties that fit together and occupy
different ecological niches. 
Agroforestry system 
Vegetables in agroforestry systems are mixed mostly with
fruit trees, leguminous trees, banana, palm trees, and other
species covering the soil. The agroforestry systems may
reach a high degree of diversity where there are fewer risks
of pest and diseases, However, these systems need continuous
organic productions in order to maintain the productivity at
acceptable levels. An example of agroforestry in the tropics is
the combination of palm trees, papaya, bananas and vegetables.
c) Organic Plant Nutrition and Fertilization
In conventional intensive vegetable production, mineral
fertilizers have been the most commonly used source to
supply nutrients to the crops. Fertilizers are applied in gran-
ular or/and liquid form (fertigation). The efficient use of
the farm nutrients sources has an important role in organic
vegetable production. The interaction of soil, climate,
plants, nutrients and farmer is a complex relationship that
must be understood by the producer in order to implement
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
160
the ideal organic fertilizer strategies. It starts with the
establishment of a locally adapted production system.
The organic fertilization in the tropics has to be adapted to
the cropping system that is used and depends on the growing
conditions and cropping combinations. The following
sources of nutrients are at the organic vegetable grower’s
disposal:   
< Cover crop (green manure) with leguminous;
< Mulching (plant residues etc.);
< Animal manure (dung and slurry);
< Compost;
< Commercial organic fertilizers.
Cover crops
Besides the beneficial proprieties of a cover crop (compe-
tition to weeds, reduce soil erosion, avoid the nutrient loss,
improve the natural crop protection, build active soils,
supply nutrients to the following crop, etc.), it is important
to take into account the good establishment of said crop in
order to improve the positive effects of using it in the crop
rotation. Successfully establishing green manures in organic
vegetable production requires:
< Sufficient water supply;
< High seed density;
< Good soil structure;
< Avoid exhausted soils or improve nutrient content 
by adding manure or compost;
< Use native leguminous cover plants; together with
local inoculants (Rhizobium).
The advantage of a leguminous cover crop is the nitrogen
fixation, which can be available to the following main crop.
There are the following leguminous cover crops that can be
applied in the tropics and subtropics: alfalfa (Medicago
sativa), desmodium (Desmodium intortum (Mill). Urb),
indigofera (Indigofera tinctoria), soybeans (Glycine max
(L.) Merr), broad beans (Vicia fava var. major), hairy vetch
(Vicia ssp) etc. In addition to leguminous crops, other crops
may be used as cover plants, for example sunflower: it has
a deep root system and helps to improve the aeration of the
soil. Cover crops should also be selected according to the
following crop. For example, hary vetch or Vicia fava or
crottolaria can be used as cover crop before planting
tomatoes; in the case of asparagus, a cover crop (e.g. Vicia
fava) can be planted directly in the crop and during the
shoot development of green asparagus.  The cover crop can
be mulched in order to mobilize the nutrients bound in the
organic matter.
Mulching and using crop residues
The crop residues are also an important source of nutrients
for the following vegetable crop. One possibility to obtain
a faster residue effect is to chop up the residues and incor-
porate them superficially 15 cm into the soil. About 80% of
the bound nitrogen in the organic material of the crop
residues can be mineralized within 6 to 8 weeks after soil
incorporation. Crop residues contain 40 to 100 kg nitrogen
per ha, according to the green mass remaining on the field.
Generally, young plant material brings a lot of nitrogen into
the soil; older material binds soil nitrogen. 
Animal manure
The animal manure it is an important source of organic
matter for the soil and nutrients for the crops. Adequate
management of the manure is essential in order to obtain
good quality  organic fertilizer and to avoid nutrient losses.
In the tropics and subtropics, the environmental conditions
can cause problems if the manure is not stored correctly.
High precipitation can wash out essential nutrients and
direct sun and high temperatures volatilize the N of the
organic matter – covering the manure with leaves is
therefore a must.
The following animal manure can be use in organic
vegetable production:
< Liquid Manure (slurry): liquid cattle manure; offers
good quantities of nitrogen, phosphorous and particularly
potassium. It is optimal to apply in vegetable production.
Liquid pork manure; it is ideal for soil with poor
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
161
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
phosphor content. Both can be used after the incorpo-
ration of a cover crop into the soil in order to avoid the 
nitrogen fixation during the decomposition of the
organic matter. In using liquid manures on vegetables,
it is important to respect the minimal hygienic 
requirements of not contaminating the crop with slurry.
In leaf vegetables (spinach, lettuce, etc.), liquid
manure can only be applied before planting or sowing.
The effect of the liquid manure to the crops is generally
quick. Liquid manure can be applied directly to 
vegetables crops that remain for longer periods in the
field. However, for crops such as carrots and onions, it is
not suitable. Depending on the type of liquid manure,
it has to be diluted with water (for example 1 part slurry:
1 part water). Do not apply slurry during sunshine. 
< Dung: cattle dung; the principal effect is the 
incorporation of organic matter, cattle dung is relatively
low in nitrogen content and high in potassium. Poultry
dung; it has a high content of P for the requirements 
of the vegetable crops but too low in potassium content
per unit of nitrogen. Should the applications of dung
(cattle or poultry) not cover the supply of nitrogen, 
liquid manure or other commercial organic fertilizers
must be  applied. The mineralization of dung is quite
slow, therefore, it is applied as a source of phosphor
and potassium. When dung is applied to vegetables, 
it is preferable to apply it directly to the field before
sowing or planting.  For root vegetable as carrots, only
very good decomposed dung should be applied.
Compost 
The compost can be applied as base fertilizer for organic
vegetables. The applied quantity of compost should not
pass the limit of phosphor requirement for the following
three years. About 50 tons per ha of compost may improve
the soil activity and enhance the mobilization of the soil
nutrients from the reserve of the soil. The amount of com-
post necessary for vegetables is about 20 to 25 m3 (details
referring to compost production: see chapter 1.2). 
Commercial fertilizers
Commercial fertilizer can be used if all other strategies do
not work due to special soil conditions (phosphor fixation
in high aluminum content soils, high deficiencies of
macronutrients as potassium or micronutrients as Fe) or a
lack of available organic material or the farm during the
conversion period. It is important that before starting with
the conversion to organic production, that care and plan-
ning be based on the constraints on plant nutrition that
could appear during the planning period and when reach-
ing a more stable soil system (close nutrient cycle). For
example, if the compost does not solve the problem, appli-
cations of rock phosphate can help to reduce such deficien-
cies. If potassium shows some deficiencies in a soil test,
materials with high K-content should be used in compost
production (e.g. wood-ashes, potassium sulphate or stone
powder). However, commercial organic fertilizers are of
additional help only when used in limited quantities.
(organic standards). For fertilizers rich in nitrogen, please
check local availability of organic wastes like hornmeal.
d) Weed Management
Weed regulation is an important issue in organic vegetable
production. The application of preventive and direct
measures has great influence in the manual work and the
economic results of the whole operation. Therefore, all
preventive and direct measures have to be carefully planned
and coordinated in order to reduce manual labor to the
maximum. With specific implementation of preventive
measures, the weed pressure and the damage to the
vegetable crop can be limited:
Direct measures
In organic vegetable production, the use of any chemical
herbicide applications is not allowed. As an alternative,
organic producers rely on mechanical and thermal methods.
Mechanical weed regulation is closely related to soil tillage
and soil management (see above). Weed management,
improvement of soil fertility and plant nutrition are planned
together in organic vegetable production. 
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
162
In organic vegetable production, it is important to have
a weed free period according to the developmental need
stages of the crop. This does not mean the complete eradi-
cation of weeds during the cropping period, but rather having
a period free of weeds during the sensible earlier stages of
the crop. After this stage, some weeds can be left to grow
again in order to protect the soil (soil erosion), absorbing
soil nutrients and enhancing the beneficial organism (insects,
spiders etc.). However, it is important to avoid that the weeds
produce seeds for further propagation. Weed management
has to be adapted to the local conditions (precipitation,
competition etc.), the species of weeds and the crop. 
Different strategies may be implemented depending
mainly on the vegetable crop, variety, soil type, kind of
equipment or equipment combination (expanding harrow,
spring harrow, orbital harrow, finger hoe, star hoe etc.).
Mechanical weeding is possible if the adequate machinery
already exists on the farm. In the case that no infrastructure
is available, manual weeding is an alternative but may
increase labor cost considerably. Thermal weed regulation
(flame weeder) might be an alternative. However, high
costs and external energy inputs limit the implementation
of this method in the tropics and subtropics. Generally,
weed and soil management requires considerable changes
in the farm infrastructure and organization and therefore
needs to be carefully prepared and planned before starting
a conversion. 
e) Pest and Disease Management
Prevention measures 
Pest and disease management is in many cases a big
challenge for organic vegetable producers in the tropics
and subtropics. However, if preventive and direct measures
are combined in an optimal way, the risk of an infection by
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
163
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 47: 
Preventive measures for weed regulation
Measure Observation
Locally adapted crops; Select appropriate varieties for the local conditions; for example, strong growing varieties for high rainy areas or drought resistant varieties 
for areas with dry periods; 
Competitive varieties Must select the most competitive varieties that have a faster seedling development and good soil cover, meaning those with wide and 
dense leaf structure;
Use crop rotations; The weed pressure in a parcel depends on the climatic conditions, the weed seed reserve in the soil and the crop rotation. Therefore, 
crop rotation and production methods  can be applied to regulate weeds. Incorporation of a faster, strong growing green manure 
plant (Cajanus cajan and Canavalis ssp);
Select the vegetable crop according the weed Annual crops and perennial crops when possible in parcels with low levels of weed pressure; 
pressure on the parcel;
Ideal preparation for the seed/planting Implement measures to control weeds before the crop is planted. E.g. letting the weeds grow and  regulating them before planting,  
bed (row, etc.); if necessary several times (=false seed bed). In arid regions: if necessary and possible, irrigate weeds in order to make then grow before 
seeding/planting vegetables;
Plant instead of sowing; Seedlings have more field advantages than a direct seeding because the plants have already passed different development stages 
and can compete faster than non germinated weeds;
Use strong young plants; Young plants with a good development and high quality are more competitive to weeds;
Balanced plant fertilization; Only a good supply of plant nutrients allows for a vigorous growing. Fertilization on the plant line improves the growth of the vegetable 
crop but not that of the weeds;
Avoid the disseminations of weeds; A well directed fermentation (enough moisture, ideal turning frequencies) of the compost produces heat to enable seeds and vegetative 
weed plant material to decompose;
Avoid seed formation of weeds; Weeds with seeds: remove as soon as possible from the fields and compost them;
Reach during the entire cropping period Keeping the soil cover with adequate underseeding, for example, a non climbing, dwarf, and dense cover plant (white clover).
a high cover of the soil; Covering the soil with mulch systems; for example mulch produce from a preceding crop, or during the mowing of the underseeding plant 
and physical mulches of plastic and new paper.
pests and diseases can be reduced to a level that does not
cause economically harmful yield reductions.
The aim of organic vegetable production is the application
of, to the greatest extent, preventive measures geared towards
maintaining and improving the health of the plant. Today, a great
number of factors and possibilities are known that directly or
indirectly influence the natural power resistance of the plants. 
In poorly aerated soil, the biological activity, the root
growth and the nutrient uptake is reduced. The resistant
power of the plants will be weak. Therefore, it is important
to utilize soil preparation gently, avoiding soil compacting
with heavy machinery when the soil is too wet. Wide and
diverse crop rotations diminish the problem with soil
diseases and pests (e.g. fusarium, sclerotinia, nematodes,
etc.). A wide distance between the plant set may avoid the
rapid dissemination of insect pests. Against some diseases
and pests, the selection of resistant varieties is one of the
best prevention strategies that can be applied to protect
vegetable crops. An equilibrated nutrient supply to the
plants and regular irrigation offer vegetables optimal devel-
opment possibilities. An excessive nutrient supply can
affect the health of plants adversely. High contents of
nitrogen foster infection through fungi and infestations of
different insects. The organic production of vegetables in
green houses must be carried out under ideal temperature
conditions; good management of the irrigation and the air
humidity is necessary in order to avoid the development of
diseases. In addition to these strategies, there are many
measures that can be used. For example, the improvement of
beneficial organisms in the field through the incorporation
of ecological compensation areas, semi-natural habitats
and intercropping methods.
Including special crops in the rotation like Tagetes helps
to control nematodes efficiently. Because almost all foliar
diseases (with exception of powdery mildew) need wet
leafs to infect a plant, the organic grower must keep his
crop dry:
5. Irrigate in the morning;
6. Use drip irrigation were appropriate (tomatoes,
cucumbers, eggplant and melon);
7. Wide plant distance.
Direct plant protection in organic vegetable production
Organic vegetable growers combine a number of direct
management methods, such as: 
< biological control (release of natural predators, 
entomopathogenous fungi, and antagonists);
< mechanical methods, such as protective nets;
< natural based fungicides, such as sulphur, copper, oils
and plant extracts.
All these methods are generally less effective compared
to chemical pesticides; therefore a combination of preven-
tive and direct measures is most successful in organic veg-
etable production. Please check with your local organic cer-
tifier whether a specific organic insecticide or fungicide is
allowed; neem, for example, is not allowed under all stan-
dards.
Diseases
Almost all substances allowed in organic vegetable produc-
tion have a preventive effect; therefore, at the first symp-
toms of diseases, they should be applied. For this reason,
regular monitoring is very important. Young plants and
diverse vegetables crops are also sensitive to some sub-
stances.  It is important to note that copper and sulphur at
higher concentrations can cause injures to the plants. The
following products are available for the direct control of
diseases in organic vegetable crops: 
1. Products that can improve the natural resistance of the
plant (plant extracts, stone powder, etc).
2. Substances with fungicidal effect (e.g. plant oils, cop-
per and sulphur).
Pests
The direct pest management methods are applied and based
only on the monitoring of traps and on an excess of possi-
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
164
ble damage limits. The risk of damage by insects can be cal-
culated on aregular basis through visual monitoring. Traps
are used to control the dissemination and infestation pres-
sure from the different pests. The following types of prod-
ucts and measures are available for the direct control of pest
insects in organic vegetable crops:
1. Products that can improve the natural resistance of the
plant (plants extracts, rock powder, etc).
2. Mechanical and bio-control measures (crop protections
nets, bacterial substances etc.)
3. Beneficial insects in green houses (wasps).
4. Preparations with insecticides effects (e.g. soap, plant
extracts).
3.1. Beans
Beans (Phaseolus vulgaris) are originally from the central
and South America. Through the increment of processing
vegetable, beans obtain their importance as fresh vegetable
world wide. The category Phaseolus L. comprises more
than 200 species however, the most commercially used are
the P. vulgaris L. ssp. vulgaris var. nanus (bush bean) and
P. vulgaris L. ssp. vulgaris var. vulgaris (runner beans).
There are different colors (yellow, blue, violet and
green) and sizes (5 to 25 cm) of pods. Also, there are different
seed colors; white, light brown, brown and white-red.
Beans have a weak main root with many secondary roots.
On the lateral roots, the root-tubers are formed with the
nitrogen fixing bacteria Rhyzobium leguminosarum, which
lives in symbiosis with the bean plant. 
3.1.1. Ecological Requirements
Soil
Beans can growth in many different soils; however, the less
ideal soils for beans are those with high content of sand or clay
and with very low pH. The optimal pH lies between 6 and 7.5.
Temperature Requirements
Beans require soil temperatures of at least 8-10 °C for
germination and at least 12°C air temperature. Furthermore,
strong winds can damage leaves and flowers resulting with
yield reduction. 
3.1.2. Planting Systems and Soil
Management
Suitable Cultivars
The amount of varieties of beans (both, bush and runner
beans) is very diverse. A selection of the beans can be carried
out according to the end purpose. (green and yellow for the
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
165
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Banana in intercropping with beans.
fresh market and processing industry.) The selections of the
varieties can be classified from the development period
(to plan for the processing industry), pod size, type of
production and resistance to diseases. Varieties for the
processing industry should be specially selected for the
harvest with machines, considering resistance and the ability
of said varieties to ripen homogeneously while demonstrating
good sensorial characteristics and global characteristics of
consistency and flavor.
Propagation and Field Preparation 
Organic beans are propagated by seeds sown directly into
the fields.
The seed bed should be middle fine, and demonstrate
few crop residues on the soil surface. A good seed bed is an
important condition for an homogeneous emergence that
improves after the mechanical weed control. 
Design of Plantation
In organic systems in the tropics and subtropics, beans
can be found in two different cropping systems, the
rotational cropping and intercropping system. Depending
on the cropping system, there are different cultural
practices:
Organic Beans under Rotational Cropping System
Plant Density
There is a close relationship between the plant density and
yield. In the tropics and subtropics, there is a high variation
of plant density, distance between the rows etc. depending
on the tools and machinery that are available in each region.
Generally, beans will be seeded with 40-50 cm distance of
row and 4-5 cm depth. Depending of the end use, variety
and local conditions, optimal plant density is 25 to 50
plants per m2. Beans for the processing industry may be
sown between 30 to 40 plants per m2 for the fresh market
and those harvested by hand several times may be sown
with 25 to 32 plants per m2. 
The start of the crop is important for the success of
bean production. Beans need the best possible seeding and
emergence conditions. Seeding by wet soils, for example,
can cause the growth of beans to completely fail. 
Crop Rotation
The productions of beans should have an interval period of
3 to 4 years if they are grown by themselves. Cereals as
oat, wheat and maize, are convenience preceding crops for
beans. However, crop harvesting with heavy machines
must be avoided, especially during soil wet conditions.
Crops that are not convenient for beans are potatoes, and
cruciferae. 
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
166
Bean plant (P. Vulgaris)
Beans leave light – available nitrogen in the soil.
Therefore, it is important to seed a cover crop (grass mixture)
or a crop after the harvest in order to fix the nitrogen in the
vegetative parts of the plants (especially in high rainy areas).
It is also recommendable to use minimum tillage to avoid
high mineralization of the organic matter. As following crops,
species with a high nitrogen demand such as lettuce, fennel,
broccoli, spinach or cauliflower are recommendable. Cereals
and arable crops can be also used as following crops to beans. 
Fertilization
A general nutrient requirements for beans is 30 kg of
nitrogen per ha, 20 kg of phosphor per ha and 70 kg of
potassium per ha. 
In normal active and organically managed soils, the
requirements of the beans may be covered without addi-
tional organic fertilizers, especially if green manure (grass
mixture) was incorporated before bean seeding. If the soils
have low nutrient content, compost or animal manure (up to
15 t/ha) should be applied 2 weeks before seeding. It is
important to avoid utilizing too much organic fertilizer
(animal manure, compost etc.), as a high supply of nutrients
makes beans more susceptible to disease. 
Organic Beans under Intercropping System
One of the most traditional methods to grow beans (runner
beans) in an intercropping system is the maize-beans-
zucchini cropping method. However, in this traditional
system, crop rotation is not implemented and generally a
repetition of the intercropping is carried out year after year.
However, in some regions a one year fallow is utilized. One
of the bases of organic agriculture is balanced crop rotation.
Therefore, adequate crop rotation has to be planned. For
example; Maize-beans-zucchini // vegetables // leguminous
as crop // cereals // green manure.
Maize and beans are mostly sown together during the
main rainy period. Because in a maize-beans-zucchini
intercropping the harvest of the product occurs separately
and the agricultural implementations are carried out with
animals, the row distance is of about 80 cm for beans. The
plant density may be of 50 plants of maize per m2, and 30
plants per m2. Zucchini is mostly planted by distributing
some seeds over the entire field according the needs of the
farmer. It is important to mention that sowing is done manual-
ly, and the depositions of the seed into the soil occurs in the
following traditional way: 3 seeds of maize and two of beans
are seeded in every 50 cm hole. After emergence, one maize
plant is removed from the each hole, and one or two bean
plants are left. The fertilization in the maize-beans-inter-
cropping can be directed from the maize plant require-
ments. However, little experience with organic fertilizers
exists. A possible recommendation for such intercropping
systems can be the following: a base organic fertilization
some weeks before sowing with 15 tons of cattle dung and
applications of compost to the maize plants in the following
maize stages: between 4 to 6 leaf stage of the maize, a hand
full of compost; at the beginning of silk emergence of
maize and at full flowering, also a hand full compost. One
possible improvement of this method is using bush beans
and planting the maize from beans separately, but in the
same line. 
Irrigation
In areas with warm and dry periods, it is recommendable to
irrigate the beans during and after the flowering. 
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
167
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Different types of beans: Vicia faba, Phaseolus vulgaris, 
Vigna angularis.
3.1.3 Pest and Disease Management
Diseases
Through appropriate crop management, especially crop
rotation and organic fertilizations, diseases are generally
not a problem. However, a number of diseases can appear:
Pest Management for Beans
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
168
Table 48: 
Disease of Beans and organic control Managment
Disease Important to Know Preventive Measures Direct Measures
Halo blight (Pseudomonas It is one of the most important bacterial bean Use of healthy seeds and resistant varieties. The first In the case of a high potential for infection, it is feasible 
syringae pv. phaseolicola) diseases. Wet and warm periods increase the infection herd must be removed from the field. to spray low dosages of cupper (be care full, leaves  
infestation possibilities. This disease is propagated can be burn). 
mostly by the infected seed. 
Antracnose (Colletotrichum This fungi cause one of the most important mycosis Preventive measures: use of healthy seeds and  
lindemuthianum) infections. Cool and wet temperatures foster the resistant varieties. Apply in four year intervals in the  
propagation of the fungi. crop rotation as the disease appears.
Sclerotina and Botrytis Avoid wet soils, high plant densities, and over 
fertilization with nitrogen. If there is a problem with 
Sclerotina, a three year interval with cereals and 
Liliaceae must be implemented.
Mosaic virus This virus causes changes in the bean leaves with tolerant varieties, virus free seeds, living barriers  
mosaic forms, eventually, the infected part of the such as maize and oat to reduce the dissemination  
plant dies. This can cause high yield losses. of aphids. 
The dissemination of the virus is via aphids, 
mechanically, and through the seed.
Table 49: 
Pests of Beans and Organic Control Managment
Pests Important to know Preventive measures Direct measures
Black Aphids (Aphis fabae) Due to dangers psed by infestation, field monitoring 
must be carried out and remove the infestations nest 
from the crop. Natural enemies must be promoted  
by leaving a high diversity of vegetation at the  
edges of the fields. 
Direct measures: eventually an application with lube 
soap, or pyrethrum and rotenone.
Bean fly (Phorbia platura, syn. Do Not use the following crops as preceding crop; Until now do not exit a direct control.  
Delia platura and D. florigale) namely, cruciferae, spinach and potatoes. 
No applications of fresh cattle manure to the crops.
3.1.4 Weed Management
Adequate weed regulation is an important base upon which
to build good yields. Early and extended weed competition
during bean development can dramatically reduce the pod
yield, while late competition with a middle weed density
may influence the yield. Therefore, it is important to have a
weed free period, between the first 4 to 6 weeks. 
A Pre-weed regulation before bean sowing of can save
much work during the growing season. Pre-weed regula-
tions consist on tillage the soil (minimum tillage or plough)
just before the sowing of the following crop. Weeds that
have emerged are then incorporated into the soil. Therefore,
it is important to wait at least two weeks after the cover crop
for the seedbed preparation.
Weeds on crop beans can be blind controlled between
the seeding and the emergence stage, with a light pressure
on the soil of a comb-harrow. The comb-harrow work can
only be successful until the 2nd and 3rd leaf stage of the
weeds; therefore, such implements must be employed as
early as possible. 
One or two passes with the comb-harrow by the first
5 to 6 weeks of bean development can regulate weeds.
The advantage of the comb-harrow is that it covers the
surface widely.
In the case that the comb-harrow can not be used,
because of wet soils or possible damage to the bean plants,
a hoeing implement can be applied. The hoe weeding
implement can control larger weeds, and generally two or
three passes are more than sufficient. Weeds that are
between the plants can be controlled manually. 
Weeds that can produce seeds during the bean crop-
ping period can affect the harvest through to seed weed
contamination, e.g. amaranth.
3.1.5 Harvesting and Post Harvest
Handling
The harvest period can be determined through the dry
matter content of the pod. (at the beginning of the harvest,
7-8%, and by the end 9-10%. As a rule the brake method
can also be used, which consists in breaking the pods
(cracks when is broken); the broken points should be
green and juicy, and the seeds (depend the variety) no
longer than 8-10 mm.
For the fresh market, the pods can be washed and assorted.
Beans can be packaged in bags or cartons and stored at 5 to
7 °C, maintaining a shelf life of 6 to 10 days. The pods
should be ties inside of the bag.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
169
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Fields of beans in Peru.
3.2 Tomato
The tomato is one of the most popular vegetables in con-
ventional and in organic agriculture. It is important for
the fresh market and for processing, and is produced all
over the world. Efficient harvesting, handling, and mar-
keting techniques are especially important in the produc-
tion of organic tomato, as it is a highly perishable crop.
Tomatoes (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.) belong to
the Solanaceae family and are related to egg plants, paprika,
and potatoes. There are different forms and colors of
tomatoes: small, medium size and long. The colors vary
from red to yellow and orange to green. 
3.2.1. Ecological Requirements
Tomatoes are found in wild form in the tropical Andes. All
similar climates and soil conditions are favorable to tomatoes.
However, tomato grows on a wide range of climates and soil.
Soil
Tomatoes do not have high requirements regarding the soil
type where they will be grown. However, heavy soils and
high clay soils can favor the development of diseases.
Loamy sandy soils with a good depth of drainage and a high
content of nutrients are ideal for tomato production.
Tomatoes grow well in alkaline soils, but the tomatoes
prefer neutral to light acid soils (pH 5.5 to 7). Tomatoes
build an extensive root system that can reach very deep zones
in the soil. Tomatoes are adventitious and propagate in large
quantities; the rooting of the soil on the first top layers is
strong, therefore care should be taken in weeding with a hoe.
Temperature
Tomatoes like warm temperatures and plenty of sunlight.
They are sensitive to low temperatures and highly sensitive
to frost. Therefore, production areas and types of green
houses have to be selected carefully. 
By temperatures over 32°C and under 15°C the tomato-
fruits do not grow uniformly. Tomatoes are self-pollinizers.
For good fecundation, tomatoes require a relative humidity
level of 60 to 80%, and a temperature around 23°C. At
temperature less than 13°C or more than 27°C, fecundation
is poor.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
170
Table 50: 
Optimal Temperature Requirements for Tomatoes
Development stage Day temperature °C Night temperature °C
Germination (W1) 23-25 23-25
Until to transplant (W2-W3) 20-22 18-20
Seedling (W2-W8) 18-20 16-18
Planting (W8-W10) 20 16-18
Final transplanting 18-20
3.2.2 Organic Tomato Production
Systems
Suitable varieties
Most traders, retailers and supermarkets actually prefer
specially firm durable varieties in order to minimize losses
due to all the handling along the logistic chain from the
field to the shop. Traditional types of tomatoes have a dura-
bility of approximately of one week; there are new varieties
for which traditional breeding (semi-longlife or longlife)
and genetic engineering (“flavor savor”) have increased
durability be four weeks. In organic agriculture, genetically
manipulated tomatoes are not allowed. For organic growers,
disease-resistance or tolerance is in many cases more
important than other factors, such as durability. For exam-
ple, “Peretti” tomatoes are more susceptible to flowering rot-
ten than round tomatoes. Furthermore, local markets
decide which varieties are in demand. Market demands,
disease resistance, suitability to cropping systems and life
storage period are factors that influence the selection of
varieties in organic tomato production.
Two different growth forms of tomatoes can be found:
plants with determinate growth (bush) and tomatoes with
an indeterminate growth (vining). Tomatoes with determinate
growth are still found in bush tomatoes and in the early
varieties used for short period growing. 
Propagation and Nursery Management
Tomatoes can be sown directly in wooding cartons or
special seeding trays. Tomatoes seeded in wooding cartons
must be transplanted into pots or special trays after two
weeks (at least after the first real leaf appears). Those seeded
in special trays can be left to grow (depending of the size of
the individual pot), until they are ready for transplanting in
the fields or into bigger pots. 
If direct seeding in big pots is carried out, some extra
seeds have to be sown to replace not germinated seeds. The
ideal time for transplanting in the field is the beginning of
flowering in the first grape. It is important that seedlings
are maintained under ideal conditions in order to obtain
strong and young plants. 
Young plants of tomatoes require a balanced nutrient
supply. The growing medium for seedling during germi-
nation time has to be low in salt content. A substrate with
peat, lime and some inert part (like perlite or pumice)
fulfilled this requirement. After transplanting, the mixture
can contain up to 50% peat, 30 % high quality compost
and 20% light soil. The use of 20-50% coir is also possible,
but the salt content has to be low (coconuts not “stored”
in the sea).
Design of the Rotation
Organic tomatoes are planted in a rotational system.
Continuous production of tomatoes can be changed in the
same year by producing lettuce, cucumber, leek, cauli-
flower, paprika or incorporating a cover crop. For farmers
that dispose of only small vegetable plots, long rotations
may be impractical. In such cases, soil building practices
(green manure, compost) that improve soil microflora
are important to promote natural disease suppressing
conditions. Pastures and small grain crops that are grown
in rotations to increase soil structure and organic matter
should be ploughed down several months in advance of
planting (problems of cutworm and wireworm). 
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
171
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Support system for tomatoes.
Organic growers have had very good experiences with
planting leguminous cover crops before the tomatoes, e.g.
hairy vetch (Vicia villosa) and fields beans (Vicia faba). 
Tomatoes are planted in the field when the first flowers
open. Different plant densities are used; for strong growing
varieties, a plant density of 2-2.2 plants per m2, for slow
growing varieties, plant to a density of 2.7-3 plants per m2.
Organic growers prefer a lower density in order to guarantee
good ventilation and reduce disease infections. 
There are different training systems used in tomato
culture. These can be unsupported on bare ground; unsup-
ported on plastic or organic mulch and supported (staked)
by wire cages, stake and weave, or trellises, either on bare
ground or plastic mulch. The two systems in widespread
commercial use are: stake and weave, and cage culture.
Each training system requires its specific  management
methods on the field. By the end of the crop, the plant can
be pruned on its top in order to avoid fruit cracking.
3.2.3 Soil Nutrition and Organic
Fertilization
Fertilization
Organic fertilization decisions are influenced by different
factors, such as soil and climate, crop rotation, manure
sources, availability of compost turners, manure spreaders,
fertilizer drills and availability of commercial organic
fertilizer. Beans need the following nutrients per ha and
year with a yield of 10-12 kg per m2: 170 kg nitrogen, 80
kg of phosphorous, 340 kg of potassium and 60 kg of mag-
nesium. Enough phosphorus and potassium are available for
tomatoes in most soils. Soils managed organically for sev-
eral years may allow acceptable tomato-yields based on
green manure with legumes and compost applications.
However, in most cases, organic growers also apply nitrogen
to the soil in the form of compost, manure and other organic
nitrogen sources. 
At the beginning of tomato development, nutrient needs
are relatively small and increase with flowering and fruit
setting. An average application before planting of 30 t/ha
compost, based on animal manure and plant materials, covers
the needs of the main nutrients for organic tomato produc-
tion. The organic fertilizer can be incorporated into the soil
during the field preparation and bedding operations, or
banded to the side of the plants. The incorporation of a
leguminous cover crop before the planting of tomatoes
improves the nitrogen supply significantly.
Additional foliar applications with substances such as
fish emulsion, seaweed, biostimulants, and compost or weed
teas may be applied in organic tomato production. However,
results of foliar fertilizations are not consistent. Fertigation
and the injection of soluble fertilizer through drip lines are
feasible with specifically formulated organic fertilizers.
Poor and deteriorated soils with low organic matter content
will probably need additional organic fertilization, such as
horn meal, rock phosphate and micronutrients (based on soil
analysis). The application of magnesium and micronutrient-
fertilizers require prior permission through certification
based on soil analysis that proves soil deficiency.
Conditions for the Nutrient Availability
Organic tomato production is based mainly on compost
applications. Nitrogen in compost is organically fixed and
has to be transformed in a soluble form (mineralized) by
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
172
Table 51: 
Mulch Management for Tomatoes
Type support Mulch Distance Distance 
system in the between
row the rows
Bush unsupported No mulch / plastic or 0.4 – 0.5 m 0.6 – 0.8 m 
tomatoes organic mulch
Stick supported No mulch / organic mulch 0.3 – 0.4 m 0.8 – 1 m
tomatoes
Greenhouse cord plastic or organic mulch 0.4 m Double rows: 
0.8 and 1.2 m
microorganisms. Soil-temperatures of 12-14°C, a good
aereation and enough soil-moisture support mineralization.
Phosphorous is not available for the tomatoes subjected to
temperatures under 14°C. A phosphorous-deficiency in toma-
toes is shown by a purple color on the under side of the leaves.
3.2.4 Irrigation
Tomatoes in full productions evaporate about 4-6 l of water
per m2 day. At the beginning and the end of the crop, 2 l per
m2 day is more than enough. To improve root development,
it is recommendable to limit irrigation for some weeks after
planting. Regular irrigation is very important for the nutrient
supply, plant health and fruit quality. Irrigation can be done
by drop irrigation (most commonly used) and flood irrigation.
Advantages and disadvantages of the different irrigation
systems have to be evaluated carefully before investing in
organic tomato production; for example: flood irrigation
may increase soil borne diseases; drip irrigation may
increase salt concentrations in the top soil. 
3.2.5 Pest and Disease Management
Tomatoes are susceptible to physiological disturbances,
diseases and pests. Priorities in organic tomato production
have all the management methods to prevent such pests and
diseases: 
< Optimal site selection;
< Selection of pest and disease resistant varieties;
< Wide rotation (in case of soil borne diseases at least
four years should be free of tomato-production);
< Creation of semi-natural habitats and ecological com-
pensation areas;
< Improvement of soil fertility and activation of soil
microbial life;
< Balanced nutrient supply;
With such measures, non parasitic damages and physi-
ological disturbances (such as green collar, blossom end rot
and cracking of fruits), as well as nutrient deficiencies can
be reduced. In addition, organic preparations are applied
(see positive lists); however, they often are less effective
than synthetic products and therefore only a combination of
preventive and curative methods leads to successful organic
tomato production. 
Disease
Preventive measures: to avoid dew formation with appro-
priate irrigation period (fungi spores, with exception of the
powdery mildew, needs free water to germinate and in the
leaf to penetrate) and the optimal row orientations to
improve air circulation, suspending field activities when
vegetation is wet, to select the optimal variety according the
local conditions. Drip irrigation promotes dry leaves.
Prevention and sanitation measures are important. These
include post-season destruction of vines by hot composting,
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
173
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Support system for tomatoes.
removal of diseased tomato plants and solanaceous weeds,
sterilization of plant stakes prior to reuse, prohibiting
tobacco use in the field, and frequent cleaning of tools and
implements to prevent carrying problems between fields. A
minimal four week solarization with clear plastic before
planting can suppress diseases, nematodes, and other pests –
attention: weeds also grow under the plastic. 
Pest insects
The management of tomato insect pests requires monitor-
ing and the integration of all possible cultural practices
(preventive measures). In addition, direct control measures
may be applied, such as: release of beneficial organisms
(biological control) and organic pest control substances
(see positive list). 
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
174
Table 52: 
Examples of Tomato Diseases and Ways to Manage them Organically
Disease Important to Know Preventive Measures Direct Measures
Early blight On leaves (oldest) dry and brown spots with Infection sources are in the soil, (attention with the Repeated copper applications, especially before rainy  
(Alternaria solani) concentric circle and bright edges; this symptom crop rotation), the seeds should be put in hot water wet periods, treatment with substances that enhance   
appears before phytophtora treatment by 50 °C during 50 min, avoid near plant resistance.  
infestation sources such as infected potatoes crops, 
harvest residues very carefully to compost.
Late blight Fungal diseases with wet green-green and later For spore germination, at least 4 h of dew on the Repeatedly copper applications, especially before    
(Phytophtora infestans) brown colored spots, high air humidity causes the leaf is necessary, high humidity increases rainy wet periods, treatment with substances that   
appearance of white mycelium on the under leaf dissemination: plants (esp. leafs) should be enhance plant resistance. 
side, the fruits stay hard, with big spots that later maintained as dry as possible (controlled irrigation, 
become rugose. drip irrigation), selections of part resistant varieties, 
no overdosing with organic fertilizer, avoid 
proximate infestation sources as potatoes crops.
Gray mould (Botrytis cinerea) The gray-green infected parts of plant show a gray The pruning of leaves should be carried out early in Infected plants are removed from the field.  
mycelium; infection of the fruits is observable the morning and during dry days, the big shoots  
through bright circles with round, darker spots. should not break, but rather cut off to 1 cm; select 
varieties with loose structures.
Leaf spot, septoria leaf spot Numerous small browns spots with gray or black Sanitation measure in the production operations, Application of copper  
centers; leaves turn yellow and drop. crop rotation, avoid water in leaves
Antracnose Fruit has small, slightly sunken circular spots that Use of resistant cultivars, optimal sanitation, crop Applications of copper, removal of severely   
spread and crack open. rotation, and physical support of plants. infected plants.
Powdery mildew Powder white spots on the upper side of the leaf, The irrigation should be optimally managed; high Treatment with untreated milk has given good results,  
(Oidium lycopersicum) the leaves become yellow and die. air humidity promotes dissemination after the also with soy lecithin and fennel oil and sulphur. 
primary infection. Use tolerant varieties. 
Viruses and bacterias Virus and bacteria are often transmitted through Infected plants must be removed as soon as possible Copper is applied against bacteria on young plants in  
contaminated clothes or tools. Therefore, maximum from the fields. stages of development. The substances must also reach  
farm sanitation is necessary. the under part of the leaves (especially in late blight 
disease).
Pest Management 
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
175
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 53: 
Examples of Tomato Pests and Ways to Manage them Organically 
Pest Damage Control
Aphids Suck sap; it is a vector of Insecticidal soap; release of beneficial insects if they are available (lady beetle, lacewings etc.); applications of beauvaria bassiana, 
diseases; creates honey dew; pyrethrum, rotenone.  
misshapen foliage, flowers 
and fruits.        
Army worm Feeds on foliage and fruit Release of beneficial insects if they are available; applications of Bt on larvae, superior oil.
Blister beetle Feeds on foliage and fruit For severe infestations, applications of pyrethrum, rotenone, or sabadilla.
Colorado potato beetle Feeds on foliage Application of Bt on larvae; encourage beneficial insects through the incorporation of ecological structures; applications of neem, 
pyrethrum, and rotenone.
Cutworm Cut plants stem Use of parasitic nematodes to soil, spreading wood ashes around the stem, moist bran mixed with Bt scattered on soil.
Flea beetle Many small holes in foliage Row covers; sanitation; applications of parasitic nematodes to soil; applications of neem, pyrethrum, rotenone, sabadilla.
Fruit worm Feeds on foliage, flower, fruit Destroy infested fruits; applications of Bt on larvae; use of row covers; applications of neem.
Hornworm Feeds on foliage and fruit Applications of Bt on larvae, pyrethrum if the infestation is severe.
Pinworm Fruit has narrow black tunnels Destroy infested fruits; application of sabadilla
Stink bug Deformed fruits with Control weeds near plants; use trap crops; attract beneficial insects by planting small-flowered plants; applications of sabadilla. 
whitish-yellow spots
Whitefly Distorted, yellow leaves, Applications of insecticidal soap; use of yellow sticky traps; release beneficial insects; applications of garlic oil; neem, pyrethrum,  
creates honey dew that rotenone, and Beauveria bassiana.
attracts sooty mold.
Table 54: 
Direct Measures for Weed-regulation in Organic Tomato Production 
Measure Advantages Disadvantages
Open soil Permits hoeing mechanically or manually, regulating weeds that grow between It is dependent of the soil and weather conditions (wet or dry); Manual regulation of  
crop rows and within tomatoes rows (manually); Mineralization of the organic weeds needs time and may be costly.
matter can be influenced; Makes able fertilizations with solid organic products.
Soil Vaporization Control weeds and soil borne diseases; Mechanical and manual Harms soil structure and microorganisms; Nutrient loss by vaporization;
hoeing are also possible, as well as the use of organic fertilization. High energy-consuming; Suitable for small plots;
Dead mulch Improves the soil structure, preserves the water in the soil, enhances the Weed growth through the mulch; Problem with the germination of mulch seeds; 
microbial activity and fauna, adds nutrients and feeds soil organism as Makes mechanical weeding more difficult; Possible pesticide residue. 
they decompose; Regulates weeds that grow within the tomatoes rows, especially 
if there is low weed pressure.
Plastic mulch Improves the soil structure; Regulates weeds growing within crop rows; Makes irrigation more difficult, but feasible; Organic fertilizations with solid 
A high content of seeds of weeds is recommended; Reduces water loss. materials are not possible; Higher cost; Some organic certifications restrict the use 
of plastic mulches
Living mulches Improves the soil structure; Compete with weeds; After mulching, provides nutrients Compete for water and nutrients, therefore living mulches require some suppression  
(cover plants) through its decomposition (legumes living mulches, hairy vetch, alfalfa). either with partial tillage or mowing. 
3.2.6 Weed Management
Successful weed regulation in organic tomato production is
based on a combination of different strategies. The planning
of a diverse crop rotation – especially those including cover
crops that compete with weeds – is the first and most
important step in organic tomato production. Organic
growers also pay a great deal of attention to sanitation
measures that avoid the introduction of weeds (seeds and
propagules). Tomatoes have a critical period of about 4-5
weeks after transplanting where they need weed-free
conditions.
3.2.7 Harvesting and Post-Harvest
Handling
Harvesting tomatoes is labor intensive. For storage and
shipping, the tomatoes can be picked at the initial stage of
maturity- when the blossom end turns pink. Tomatoes
can be harvested 2-3 times per week, preferably in the
morning. Temperature-management is critical to maintain
quality. The tomatoes should be stored at 10-13°C. The
flavor will be reduced if tomatoes are stored at low tem-
peratures; high temperatures accelerate fruit ripening. 
In comparison to conventional production of toma-
toes, the yield of organic grown tomatoes is comparable
if all measures were managed correctly during the
growing period . 
3.3. Cabbage
Cabbage is the oldest and most widely grown vegetable of
the Brassica group, belonging to the mustard family. It is a
biennial plant, producing its large, waxy leaves surrounding
smaller compacted head leaves in the first year, and a
flower stalk bearing yellow flowers in the second year.
It takes 90 to 120 days from seed to harvest, often being
transplanted as a seedling from a nursery at a young age.
Cabbage (Brassica oleracea L. convar. capitata var.
capitata) is one of the world’s most important vegetables,
especially in the temperate zone. Most processed cabbage
goes for the production of sauerkraut.
3.3.1. Ecological Requirements
Temperature
As a cool season crop, cabbage grows at a temperatures
ranging from 0 to 25°C, with an optimum temperature
range of 15 to 20°C.
Soil
Cabbage may be grown on a variety of soils but it does best
on a well- drained, loam soil well supplied with organic
matter. Sandy loams are preferred for early crops. As
cabbage is sensitive to soil acidity soil pH should be
between 6.5 and 7. 
Irrigation
Cabbage crops require a constant amount of water
supply throughout the whole season in order to prevent
the cracking of heads. Depending on the production site,
an irrigation system should be in place. Soil type does
not affect the amount of total water needed, but does dic-
tate frequency of water application. Lighter soils need
more frequent water applications, but less water is
applied per application.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
176
3.3.2. Organic Cabbage Production
Systems
Suitable Varieties
Hybrid varieties dominate. White and red cabbage exist,
but the white variety dominates the market. Various varieties
are available that are resistant to heat, cold and a number of
important diseases and physiological disorders. Choose
varieties available on the local market carefully. Growth
period differs from approximately 75 days for early varieties,
90 days for mid-season, to over 120 days for late large-headed
varieties (from seed to maturity).  
Important Considerations for Field Selection
With respect to the selection of an appropriate field before
planting cabbage (and all other crucifer plants too), consid-
er the following important factors which affect a number of
diseases such as club root and Sclerotinia: 
< No crucifer crop, or related weed has been in the field
for at least 2 years, 4 years preferable. Crucifer crops
include cabbage, cauliflower, broccoli, kale, kohlrabi,
Chinese cabbage, mustards, turnips, rutabagas, radishes
etc. Cruciferous weeds include wild radish, shep-
herdspurse, wild mustards etc. Also, crucifer plant
waste should not be dumped on these fields.
< Fields with club root in the past needs strict control 
of soil pH, which should be over 6.5. Application of
lime could some weeks before planting the cabbage
seedlings is reported to reduce further infection.
Seed, Transplant Production and Field Seeding 
Cabbage is both direct seeded and transplanted. Hot water
seed treatment is used under certain conditions (especially
for transplant production) to reduce the infection with seed
borne diseases (50° C for 25 to 30 minutes; after, the wet
seed must be quickly cooled and dried). Hot water seed
treatment requires extensive experience and should be
performed by knowledgeable experts. 
For seedings in seedbeds for transplant production,
choose a site where crucifer crops have not been grown
before. Fresh market cabbage and may be field seeded or
transplanted. Cabbage for processing is generally field seeded.
Direct seeding might be more problematic poor germina-
tion sometimes occurs and weed management at this devel-
opment stage is more difficult.
Preparation for direct seeding requires the same atten-
tion given a seed bed area. A fine textured soil, free of
rocks, clods and trash, firm and very level, is required for
mechanical seeding. After the first true leaves have formed,
growers have to strive for the right plant density. Thinning
out to leave 38 to 45 cm between them. Spacing between
rows should also be 38 to 45 cm. In the case that tractors
are used, 4 rows should be planted as one set, leaving the
necessary distance between sets to accommodate tractor
tire width.
3.3.3. Soil Nutrition and Organic
Fertilization
Fertilization
If a mineral soil is below pH 6.3 or an organic soil is below
5.5 and/or the calcium (Ca) level is below 8 meq/100g soil
lime should be applied. Compared to other vegetables,
cabbage has a fairly high lime requirement. Lime should be
mixed into the seedbed at least several weeks before seeding
and preferably the preceding year. A lime application is
effective over several years. 
Cabbage up-take of nitrogen and potassium is high in
comparison to other vegetables. On the one hand, application
of a well balanced compost (enriched with rock-phosphates,
wood ash/potassium) when preparing the seedbed for
cabbage is recommended. Furthermore, a leguminous
plant like pea, beans and/or alfalfa should be planted the
year/season before cabbage to enrich the soil with nitrogen
rich organic materials. 
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
177
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
3.3.4. Pest and Disease Management
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
178
Table 55: 
Examples of Cabbage Diseases and Ways to Manage them Organically 
Disease Symptoms Preventive Measures
Black Blight Aboveground portions show symptoms. Dark concentric rings with definite 1. Locate plant beds 1 mile or more from diseased fields.   
Mycosphaerella brassicicola edges surrounded by a yellowish zone. Dark lesions may develop on stored 2. Burn straw stacks, and plow under diseased refuse of cabbage, turnip, and  
cabbage and may penetrate deeply. rutabaga seed fields immediately after harvest and before transplanting the 
new crop 
Hot water seed treatment at 122°F for 30 min eliminates seedborne inoculum. 
Treat a small quantity of each seed lot, and test the germination before treating 
all the seed
Downy Mildew (Staghead) Starting with small, light green-yellow lesions on the upper leaf surface (later • Eradicate cruciferous weeds (fungus hosts) 
Peronospora parasitica showing on the undersurface and spots turning to yellow. At a later stage leaf • Manage irrigation to reduce periods of high humidity 
may become papery and die. Cabbage heads develop sunken black spots. 
Sclerotinia Stem Cottony white mold on aboveground parts (sclerotina changing from white • Rotate using nonsusceptible crops such as grass or grains.  
(Sclerotinia sclerotiorum) to black) • Encourage maximum air movement between rows.
Black Spot (Leaf, Stem, or Yellow spots develop, enlarging to circular areas with concentric rings and • Wide rotation  
Pod Spots) Alternaria possibly surrounded by yellow halos. Centers may be coated with black • Use clean seed. Seed not known to be clean may be treated in water at 50°C  
brassicae and A. brassiciola. spore masses. for 25 to 30 min.
• Bury or remove crucifer residues.
Bacterial Soft Rot (Erwinia Small, water-soaked areas appear and rapidly enlarge. Tissue becomes soft • Set out plants in rows to allow good air drainage.
carotovora subsp. carotovora) and mushy, and within a few days the affected plant part may collapse. • Cultivate carefully to minimize injuring plants.  
An offensive odor usually is present • Control frequency and source of irrigation water. 
• Avoid frequent irrigation during head development. 
• Time irrigation to allow the head to dry rapidly. 
• Avoid stagnant water sources. 
• In storage, use a buffering material such as straw or paper to prevent injury 
to the heads. 
• Keep storage house humidity between 90 and 95% and the temperature 
between 0-4°C
Clubroot The disease is The distinctive symptom is abnormally large roots--fine roots, secondary roots, • Care for uninfected seedbeds, seeds, transplants, drainage water, irrigation   
caused by Plasmodiophora the taproot, or even on the underground stem. Roots develop clubs (swellings). water and equipment
brassicae, can survive in soil • Long rotations (6 years or longer) help prevent a pathogen buildup and reduce  
18 years or more after an disease. 
infected crop. • Control wild mustards if they are a weed problem. 
Black Leg and Phoma Root Rot Pale, irregular spots on leaves later become ashy gray with scattered black • Plant only stock seed free of the fungal pathogen.   
Phoma lingam (sexual stage: dots (pycnidia) on the surface. Stem lesions are elongated with purple borders • Treat infested seed 25 to 30 min in water at 50° C.   
Leptosphaeria maculans) near the soil line and extend below the soil surface, causing a black rot of • Seedbeds should not have crucifer crops on or near them for at least 5 years.
lower stem and roots. • Inspect seedbeds for obvious foliar infections. 
• Transplants, if lifted, should not be dipped in water before transplanting.
Phytophthora Root Leaf margins discolor, turn brown, and eventually die. Aboveground portions • Plant only on well-drained soil that has a minimum of low areas where water   
(Phytophthora megasperma ) of the plant wilt, and plants may die. Lateral roots are absent or entirely can accumulate. 
decayed. Symptomatic plants are found in wet areas of the field. • Avoid excessive irrigation. 
• Practice a 3-year rotation with nonsusceptible crops.
Damping-off (Wirestem) Damping-off kills seedlings before or soon after they emerge. • In the greenhouse or seedbed, pasteurize the soil with solar radiation 
Pythium spp., Fusarium spp. • Make seedbeds on well-drained soil; avoid excessive irrigation.  
and Rhizoctonia solani • Space rows and/or seedlings in the seedbed to maximize air movement. 
• Carefully examine seedlings when transplanting; discard any with signs 
of wirestem. 
• If damping-off occurs, stop watering for a while. Allow soil to dry somewhat 
around the plants. If the seedlings are in flats or in cold frames, give them 
as much air and light as possible. 
• Rotation with cereals may reduce pathogen populations in soil. 
• Remove or encourage decomposition of plant debris.
Disease
Cabbage plants are susceptible to physiological disturbances,
diseases and pests. Preventive measures against such pests 
and diseases have priority in organic cabbage production: 
< Optimal site selection
< Selection of pest and disease resistant varieties
< Wide rotation 
< Creation of semi-natural habitats and ecological com-
pensation areas
< Improve soil fertility and activate soil microbial life
< Balanced nutrient supply
With these preventive measures, most pest and disease
problems can be avoided or reduced. In addition, organic
preparations can be applied (see positive lists); however,
they often are less effective than synthetic products.
Therefore, only a combination of preventive and curative
methods lead to a successful organic cabbage production.
Attention must be given to the legal requirements for
organic agriculture (e.g. EU-regulation only allows for a
restrictive use of means like copper, natural insecticides
etc.). In case new preparations should be applied, final
approval granted by the responsible certification body
is necessary.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
179
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 56: 
Examples of Cabbage Pests and Ways to Manage them Organically 
Pest Damage Control
Aphids, including Cabbage aphid Cabbage and turnip aphids are gray mealy plant lice forming colonies Lady bird beetles 
Brevicoryne brassicae Turnip aphid on foliage or in heads or in buds. Weaken plants and constitute an  
Hyadaphis erysimi Green peach aphid adulterant in processed foods. 
Myzus persicae
Cabbage maggot Delia brassicae White maggots that feed on roots and underground stems and weaken, 
lodge, and kill plants.
Cabbage Head Caterpillar Destruction of the growing point by extremely mobile larvae Strategies must be include diamondback moth: Cabbage planting during 
Crocidolomia binotalis rainy season; Hand removal of eggs and early larvaetwice per week; 
Trapping plants like Indian mustard have shown good results; Neem kernel 
extract 
Diamondback moth Plutella xylostella Small, pale yellowish-green larvae with erect black hairs. Eats holes in Planting of trap crops (collards) between cabbage rows and/or around the  
foliage. Adults are small gray or brown moths with white marks on cabbage field; Sexual pheromones; Spraying of B. thuringiensis; Larval  
forewings that form a diamond when wings are folded. parasitoid Diadegma semiclausum;
Flea beetles including cabbage flea Small, shiny, steel-blue, jumping beetle. Eats round holes in leaves of wild Intercropping with garlic; Early season trap crop along the field; garlic   
beetle Phyllotreta cruciferae and cultivated crucifers. Particularly serious on seedlings. mixture with water; Neem and Derris;
Imported cabbage worm Pieris rapae Large holes in leaves, attacks the head near maturity, leaving damage Sabadilla (Schoenocaulon officinale) powder in combination with Derris dust  
similar to that of diamondback moth (be careful as sabadilla is toxic to honey bees);
Loopers, including Cabbage looper Larvae damage plants by chewing holes in leaves Bacillus thuringiensis; Mass release of Trichogramma spp; Sabadilla 
Trichoplusia ni Alfalfa looper (Schoenocaulon officinale) powder in combination with Derris dust   
Autographa californica (be careful as sabadilla is toxic to honey bees);
Pest Insects
3.3.5. Harvesting and Post Harvest
Handling
Cabbage for processing should be delivered to the processor
as soon after harvest as possible. Heads should be harvested
when firm and before they split or burst. In harvesting for
fresh market, leave 4-6 wrapper leaves attached to the head.
The wrapper leaves are usually removed when harvesting
for kraut.
Storage
Store cabbage at 0° C and a relative humidity of 98 to
100%. If stored under proper conditions late cabbage
should keep for 5 to 6 months. The longest keeping cul-
tivars belong to the Danish class. Early-crop cabbage,
especially southern grown, has a storage life of 3 to 6
weeks. Cabbage is successfully held in common storage,
where a fairly uniform inside air temperature of 0 to 1.6°C
can be maintained.
Cabbage wilts quickly if held under too dry storage
conditions; hence, the humidity should be high enough to
keep the leaves fresh and turgid. Use of polyethylene liners
or pallet covers to prevent desiccation can prove desirable
under some storage conditions. The storage life of late
cabbage can be extended for several months if it is held in
an atmosphere with 2.5 to 5 % oxygen and 2.5 to 5 %
carbon dioxide. 
Cabbage should be handled carefully from field to
storage, and only solid heads with no yellowing, decay, or
mechanical injuries should be stored. Before the heads are
stored, all loose leaves should be trimmed away; only three
to six tight wrapper leaves should be left on the head. Loose
leaves interfere with ventilation between heads, and venti-
lation is essential for successful storage. Upon removal
from storage, the heads should be trimmed again to remove
loose and damaged leaves. Cabbage should not be stored
with fruits emitting ethylene. 
3.4. Asparagus
Asparagus (Asparagus officinalis L.) belongs to the family
of Liliaceae. It grows very well in warm countries with
much sunshine. The only condition is a cool period of at
least 2 months as a resting time for the plants.
Asparagus is one of the most valuable perennial
vegetable crops. Plants are not difficult to grow and will
thrive under a variety of conditions. They tolerate drought,
though the yield and quality are greatly reduced. A good
supply of water will help to produce a large yield of juicy,
crisp shoots for immediate use, quick-freezing or canning.
With proper care, an asparagus bed should produce for
20 years or more. 
The production potential is high due to the long vegetation
period. The harvesting period can last up to 3 months.
3.4.1. Ecological Requirements
Asparagus should not be planted in any field in which
asparagus had been planted in the past in order to reduce
the incidence of Fusarium wilt and several root rots.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
180
Field of Asparagus in Jordania.
Deep soil is necessary because asparagus is a deep-rooted
plant. Good drainage is essential, and while flooding for a
short time in the spring may be permitted, the surface water
must be removed quickly during the growing season.
Perennial weeds must be eliminated the year prior to planting.
The ideal site should have full sun exposure. 
Asparagus is a heavy feeder and requires rich soil that
is well prepared before planting. Poorly drained soils, too
deep planting and too much organic fertilizer reduce the
lifespan of the plants due to fungae attacks on the roots. In
selecting sites, consider risk from soil insects. Check for
wireworms if old pastures or alfalfa fields are to be used.
Soil
Asparagus can be grown on many types of soil, but good
drainage is imperative.
The best type of soil for asparagus is a deep, rich, well-
drained, sandy loam. Asparagus roots may reach a depth of
3 meter and the soil should allow full development of the
storage roots.
Heavy (clay) soils are reasonably satisfactory if the top
layer is of good depth (15 to 20 cm.) and an abundance of
organic matter has been incorporated into the soil. 
Soils ranging from slightly acid to slightly alkaline
(pH. 6.0-7.5) are best. Asparagus will tolerate soils too
acidic or too alkaline for many other crops, but yields on
such soils may be lower.
Temperature
Asparagus germinates well at temperatures ranging
between 15 and 30 °C. It does not grow at temperatures
bellow 5°C and above 40°C.
3.4.2. Organic Asparagus Production
Systems
Suitable Varieties
American varieties like “Mary Washington” and
“California 500” which are resistant against rust, are very
popular.
Propagation and nursery management
Seedling Preparation
Seeds are sown in the spring, at 3-4 cm of depth, 4-5 cm of
distance in the row and 0.6 m between rows. Distances
should be adapted in accordance to the percentage of
germination of the seed, which has to be tested before 
plantation. After sowing, irrigate the seeds until germination
and cover the soil with dead mulch to protect against weed.
One year old seedlings are best to use for transplantation.
Because of their fine and sensitive roots, they should be
carefully managed.
Transplantation of Seedlings
Place the plants in a trench 0.30-0.45 m wide and 0.30 m
deep. The crowns should be spaced 0.25-0.40 m apart.
Spread the roots out uniformly, with the crown bud side up,
in an upright, centered position, slightly higher than the
roots.
Cover the crown with two inches of soil. Gradually fill
the remaining portion of the trench during the first summer
as the plants grow taller. Asparagus has a tendency to “rise”
as the plants mature, the crowns gradually growing closer
to the soil surface. Apply an additional 3-5 cm of soil
between the rows in later years.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
181
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Field of Asparagus with irrigation system.
Design of the rotation
One year before final transplant in the field it is useful to
sow a legume as green manure to increase organic matter
and nitrogen content of the soil.
3.4.3. Soil Nutrition and Organic
Fertilization
Fertilization
Fertilize trenches with organic compost or manure and
lime, 10-15 days before transplanting seedlings. To
improve soil conditions, sow Lathyrus sativus as a green
manure during the winter, when the asparagus becomes
dormant.
3.4.4. Irrigation
Irrigate as needed and to keep ferns growing vigorously.
Six to 8 irrigations may be needed during the first and sec-
ond year. During the cutting season 1-2 irrigations should
be adequate. Refill the soil profile after harvest through
several irrigations to promote good fern growth. 
Irrigate as necessary to promote and sustain good fern
growth after harvest well into the fall. Asparagus water use
during fern growth is reported to be 6.8 inches in July, 7.6
in August and 4.6 in September (in Brazil). Fall irrigation is
reported to increase yields the following spring and to
reduce winter freeze damage. 
Soil type does not affect the amount of total water needed,
but does dictate frequency of water application. Lighter
soils need more frequent water applications, but less water
applied per application. Asparagus is often grown with
furrow irrigation.
3.4.5. Pest and Disease Management
Preventive measure against such pests and diseases have
priority in organic eggplant production: 
< Optimal site selection
< Selection of pest and disease resistant varieties
< Wide rotation (to avoid soil borne diseases)
< Creation of semi-natural habitats and ecological com-
pensation areas
< Improve soil fertility and activate soil microbial life
< Balanced nutrient supply
With these preventive measures most pest and disease
problems can be avoided or reduced. In addition, organic
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
182
Organic Asparagus
preparations can be applied (see positive lists); however,
they often are less effective than synthetic products.
Therefore, only a combination of preventive and curative
methods leads to a successful organic asparagus produc-
tion. Attention must be given to the legal requirements for
organic agriculture (e.g. EU-regulation for organic agricul-
ture only allows for a restrictive use of means like copper,
natural insecticides etc.). In case new preparations should
be applied, approval granted by the responsible certifica-
tion body is necessary.
Disease
Pest Insects
3.4.6. Weed Management
Weeds and grasses are the worst problems for asparagus.
They compete with the developing spears, make an
unsightly area in the field and significantly decrease yield
and quality. 
3.4.7. Harvesting and Post Harvest
Handling
Asparagus is not harvested the first year (the year of crown
establishment). Second year harvest is usually limited to
4-6 weeks depending on crop vigor. Full-season harvest is
conducted the third year but full production usually occurs
about the 4th year. Asparagus fields last about 12 to 15
years although some fields may remain productive for
over 20 years. 
The harvested asparagus is very sensitive to high tem-
perature. The shoot continues to grow even after cutting and
become hard through sclerenchymisation. There should be
no more than 3 hours between cutting and the delivery to a
cooling room or in the factory.
Due to the fast growing shoots, it may be necessary to
harvest twice per day.
After harvest, several factors contribute to fiber for-
mation. Most post-harvest fiber development occurs within
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
183
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 57: 
Examples of Asparagus Diseases and Ways 
to Manage them Organically 
Disease Symptoms Preventive Direct measures
measures
Puccinia asparagi Resistant varieties Copper applications
Table 58: 
Examples of Asparagus Pests and Ways 
to Manage them Organically
Pest Damage Control
Spotted asparagus Brick-red, black-spotted Rotenone, handpicking 
beetle Crioceris adult appears late in spring.  
duodecimpunctata Adults attack both spears 
and ferns. Larvae feed on 
berries.
Cutworms and Tend to climb and feed on Cultural Methods: Plowing one   
Armyworms growing spears month before planting to turn 
caterpillars/larvae to the surface;
hand-picking at night for removal
of larvae; Natural insecticides: 
Derris, Rotenon
Wireworms Ctenicera Kill and weaken young Intercropping of garlic  
and Limonius spp. plants and eat holes in 
spears
Table 59: 
Direct Measures for Weed-regulation in Organic
Cabbage Production
Measure Advantages Disadvantages
Soil cover with dry High efficacy against weeds High labor 
material
Soil cover with living High efficacy agaisnt weeds Eventually, they will compete for  
plants water and nutrients
Hoeing High costs
24 hours. This can be slowed dramatically by cooling
promptly to 2° C. There is an increase in fiber with storage,
especially at higher than optimum temperatures, but the
increase is low under proper storage. Fiber content (or at least
its integrity) can even be reduced under CA (controlled
atmosphere) storage with low oxygen and high carbon
dioxide levels. Water-loss after harvest also increases fiber
development, making humidity in storage an important
consideration. Film wraps or placing butt ends on water
pads also helps reduce fiber development.
The recommended holding and shipping temperature is
0°C, with a relative humidity of 95%. Keep asparagus upright
in containers with moisture pads whenever possible. 
Fresh asparagus is highly perishable and deteriorates
rapidly at temperatures above 4°C. Thus, the spears should
be cooled immediately after cutting, preferably by hydro-
cooling. In addition to general deterioration, spear growth,
loss of tenderness, loss of flavor, loss of vitamin C, and
development of decay take place at moderately high
temperatures. Asparagus can be kept successfully for
about 3 weeks at 1°C and 4-5 weeks in controlled atmosphere
storage (see below). It can be held for about 10 days at 0°C,
but it is subject to chilling injury when held longer at this
temperature. 
High relative humidity is essential to prevent desiccation,
particularly at the butt ends. Commonly, the desired relative
humidity is obtained by placing the butts of asparagus on
wet pads. A high relative humidity can also be obtained by
prepackaging spears in perforated film. Non-perforated
film is not acceptable because the extent of increases in
carbon dioxide and decreases in oxygen may be injurious
and because enough ethylene may accumulate to toughen
the spears. 
Asparagus with white butts is less perishable than all-
green asparagus. Bacterial soft rot, which can occur at either
the tip or butt of the asparagus, is the principal decay. 
Asparagus may be damaged by exposure to ethylene,
and should not be stored with apples, or other ethylene
generating material. Adverse exposure may result in
undesirable elongation, curving, and toughening. 
Controlled-atmosphere storage is beneficial to aspara-
gus, even for a short periods because it delays decay and
toughening, which occur rapidly after harvest. Gas
concentrations should be 2-3% oxygen and 5-10% carbon
dioxide at 1-2°C. If temperature control is uncertain and
might exceed 7°C, the carbon dioxide concentration
should not exceed 7 %; but if the temperature is maintained
at 0°C, a 12 percent concentration is suggested. Brief
exposure to 20 % carbon dioxide will reduce soft rot at
the butt end.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
184
3.5. Carrots
Carrots (Daucus carota L. ssp. sativus) belong to the
Apiaceae family and is a hardy, cool-season biennial that is
grown for the thickened root it produces in its first growing
season. 
Although carrots can endure summer heat in many
areas, they grow best when planted in the cool season.
Carrots are eaten both raw and cooked and they can be
stored for winter use. They are rich in carotene (the source
of vitamin A) and high in fiber and sugar content.
3.5.1. Ecological Requirements
The carrot is a plant that grows in mediterranian climates.
Maximum growth is reached at a medium temperature of
18° C and a well balanced water supply. It withstands low
temperatures, even light freeze, but suffers under heat and
drought. However, adapted varieties make growing of
carrots at temperatures around 25° C possible.
A soil temperature in the range of 15 to 20° C produces
the sweetest, most tender and brightly colored roots. Higher
soil temperatures lead to stubbier roots with a woody
texture and strong flavor. While the total percentage of
sugar in a carrot root does not increase with age, there is a
shift from glucose (simple sugar) to sucrose (table sugar).
This causes a gradual increase in sweetness.
Soil
Deep, well-drained, sandy loam and muck soils of pH 5.5
to 7.0 are desirable. A chisel plow is recommended to work
these soils to a depth of 12 to 15 inches for good root
penetration. Soils should be bedded to obtain optimum
drainage and maximum root length and smoothness.
3.5.2. Organic Carrot Production
Systems
Suitable Varieties
It is important that season specific varieties for summer or
winter are used.
Propagation 
Carrots are sown directly on the field. In order to archive a
high percentage of germinating seeds, the soil structure
should be well prepared (without excessive tillage). Seeds
need to be planted near to the surface and to be covered
lightly with 0.3-0.6 cm of soil. Germination is slow and
irregular. 
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
185
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Organic Carrots
Carrot cultivation for seed production of different varieties
must be widely separated for purity reasons. This includes
wild carrots from adjacnet areas, as they are able to cross
with cultivars.
Design of the Rotation
Carrots may be rotated with alfalfa or other leguminous
cover crops, small grains, onions, spinach. In order to
reduce soil borne disease problems rotation with crops like
celery, parsley, beets and sesbania shall be avoided.
3.5.3. Soil Nutrition and Irrigation
Fertilization
Levels of phosphorus and potassium should be higher if
compared to other crops. Also, boron deficiency can lead to
carrot cracking.
Irrigation
Moisture management in carrots is especially important
during stand establishment and during root expansion.
Since small carrot seeds are unable to emerge when surface
crusting occurs and can be burnt off if surface temperatures
are too high, irrigation during the pre-emergence period
revolves around maintaining a moist, cool, loose soil surface.
This often requires frequent, light irrigation.
Conversely, deep, excessive irrigation during this period
promotes problems with damping off of emerging seedlings.
In the remainder of the season, available soil moisture
should be depleted by no more than 50 percent. However,
maintenance of excessively moist soil may cause anaerobic
soil conditions that can kill the root growing point, resulting
in misshapen carrots at harvest. 
As carrot roots develop most of their size in the last half
of their growth period, irrigation is especially critical dur-
ing this time. Water deficit during this period will have the
greatest negative impact on yields. A balance must be
struck, however, between maintaining adequate moisture
while minimizing wetness in the canopy that promotes
common fungal diseases such as alternaria and cercospora. 
During the last half of the growing period, irrigate only
early in the day to allow for rapid canopy drying whenever
possible. Soils should also be allowed to dry to 50 percent
of available soil moisture during harvest to prevent exces-
sive cracking and damage to roots during harvest.
On most soils, weekly irrigation during the peak is ade-
quate, however with sandy and sandy loam soils, irrigation
may be required as frequently as every three to four days.
If irrigation is used, plant seed on raised beds, as 2-3
acre-feet of water is needed to grow a crop.
3.5.5. Pest and Disease Management
Preventive measure against such pests and diseases have
priority in organic carrot production: 
< Optimal site selection
< Selection of pest and disease resistant varieties
< Wide rotation (to avoid soil borne diseases)
< Creation of semi-natural habitats and ecological 
compensation areas
< Improve soil fertility and activate soil microbial life
< Balanced nutrient supply
< Intercropping of different vegetables
With these preventive measures most pest and disease
problems can be avoided or reduced. In addition, organic
preparations can be applied (see positive lists); however,
they often are less effective than synthetic products.
Therefore only a combination of preventive and curative
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
186
Table 60: 
The following Planting Scheme is Reported
Type Distance in the row Distance between the row
Daucus carota 0,2 m 0,3 – 0,4 m
methods lead to successful organic carrot production.
Attention must be paid to the legal requirements for organ-
ic agriculture (e.g. EU-regulation for organic agriculture
only allows for a restrictive use of means like copper, natu-
ral insecticides etc.). In case new preparations should be
applied, approval granted by the responsible certification
body is necessary.
Disease
Pest Insects
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
187
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 62: 
Examples of Carrot Pests and Ways to Manage them Organically
Pest Damage Control
Aphids, including Considered a vector of certain virus diseases Support of natural enemies like lady beetles and parasitic wasps; In urgent cases 
the “Carrot aphid” Cavariella applications of B. bassiana and/or rotenone; nicotine, tobacco extracts 
aegopodii
Carrot rust fly (Psila rosae ) Worms burrow into and through roots. Burrows are often filled rust-red frass with
Cutworms (many species) Small to large larvae that feed on roots and foliage. Support of natural enemies; Cultural Methods: Plowing one month before planting 
to turn caterpillars/larvae to the surface; Hand-picking at night for removal of 
larvae; Natural insecticides like Derris, Rotenon; Depending on the site and crop 
flooding of the field is reported to help;
Vegetable Weevil Tunnels being eaten into the roots Support of natural enemies of adults and larvae (e.g. birds, ants, wasps, parasitic 
(Listroderes Dificilis) nematodes, tachnid flies); Cultural control: wide crop rotation (including other 
hosts plants); Wild hosts like chickweed should be removed adjacent to the 
carrot field;
Slugs Beer traps
Wireworms Intercropping of garlic
Nematoids (Meloidogyne spp) Produce warts on the carrots surface, as well as splitting into two Crop rotation, especially with certain legumes as green manure
Table 61: 
Examples of Carrot Diseases and Ways to Manage them Organically
Disease Symptoms Preventive measures Direct measures
Black leaf spot (Macrosporium carotas) Small dark spots with yellow centers on leaves Good quality seeds; crop rotation Copper applications
Sclerotium rolfsii Stem attack ( sometimes roots) with dark Soil solarization/Solar heating; Organic Anatagonistic fungi like Trichoderma harzianum   
brown lesions symptoms material even straw added to the soil increase and Bacillus subtilis; 
growth of antagonistic soil organisms; Onion 
as a pre-crop may reduce disease incidence;
3.5.6. Weed Management
Weed management is important mostly during the first
stages, when the carrot plants are still very small and
weak. Soil should be covered with dry matter of any
kind.
3.5.7. Harvesting and Post Harvest
Handling
Carrots harvested and handled in hot weather are more
likely to decay, and care should be exercised in handling to
prevent wilting.
Mature carrots are well adapted for storage and are
stored in large quantities during the fall and winter for both
the fresh market and processing. Careful handling during
and after harvest to avoid bruising, cutting and breakage
will help ensure successful storage.
Mature topped carrots can be stored 7 to 9 months at 0°
to 1°C with a very high relative humidity, 98 to 100 %.
However, even under these optimum conditions 10 to 20 %
of the carrots may show some decay after 7 months. Under
commonly found commercial conditions (0° to 4°C) with
90 to 95 % relative humidity, 5 to 6 months storage is a
more realistic expectation. Prompt cooling to 4°C or below
after harvest is essential for extended storage. Poorly
pre-cooled roots decay more rapidly. 
Carrots lose moisture readily and wilting results.
Humidity should be kept high. Carrots stored at 98 to 100%
relative humidity develop less decay, lose less moisture,
and remain crisper than those stored at 90 to 95 % relative
humidity. A temperature of –1°C to 1°C is essential if decay
and sprouting are to be minimized. With storage at 4 to
10°C, considerable decay and sprouting may develop
within 1 to 3 months.
Pre-storage washing of carrots may be desirable if they
are harvested under wet conditions. Many potential decay-
causing organisms are removed by washing. Also, clean,
washed carrots allow freer air circulation. Air circulation
between crates of pallet boxes in which carrots are stored
is desirable to remove respiratory heat, maintain uniform
temperatures, and help prevent condensation. An air
velocity of about 14 to 20 ft/min is adequate at low storage
temperatures.
Bitterness in carrots, which may develop in storage, is
due to abnormal metabolism caused by ethylene. This gas
is given off by apples, pears, and certain other fruits and
vegetables and from decaying tissues. Bitterness can be
prevented by storing carrots away from such products.
Also, development of bitterness can largely be avoided by
low-temperature storage, as it minimizes ethylene produc-
tion. Some surface browning or oxidative discoloration
often develops in stored carrots. 
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
188
3.6. Cucumber
Cucumbers (Cucumis sativus L.) are grown for eating fresh
or preserving as pickles. Cucumbers have two different
flowers, male and female. Male flowers open first and
always drop off. Female flowers form the cucumber should
not drop off. Therefore it is important to have honey bees or
bumblebees near the field that pollinate the flowers and
improve fruit formation. Cucumbers are vining plants,
members of the Cucurbita family that includes pumpkins,
squash, and gourds. They grow best when allowed to sprawl
along the ground on the seeding bed. This is because
secondary roots will develop along the vine at the junction
between the vine and the leaf. Secondary roots are a source
of additional nutrients for plants and fruits. 
3.6.1. Ecological Requirements
Cucumbers must be grown in warm temperatures and full
sunlight; avoid planting cucumbers in the rainy seasons and
on very windy areas. They mature quickly and are well
suited to field growth. Cucumbers do best in loose, sandy
loam soil but can be grown in any well drained soil with
a pH 6.0 to 7.3. 
3.6.2. Organic Cucumber Production
Before preparing the soil, all big rocks and large sticks have
to be removed from the soil. Residues of plant materials
have to be incorporated into the soil at least 4 weeks before
planting or seeding. Weeds have to be regulated before
planting cucumbers with a superficial soil tillage (harrow).
Good preparation of the seed bed is important because
cucumbers root in very shallow soil. The soil has to be
worked into beds 10 to 15 cm high and at least 1.50 to
3.0 m apart. Ridges are especially important in heavy soils
and poorly drained areas because cucumbers must have
good drainage.
Suitable Varieties
There is a vast diversity of cucumber varieties that can be
used for growing. Organic growers select the most disease
resistant varieties (e.g. powdery mildew) and those varieties
with good yield and good quality properties. Generally, two
types of cucumbers are grown. Slicing types get 15 to 20 cm
long and 3 cm or more in diameter when mature. Pickling
types are 8 to 10 cm long and up to 2.5 cm in diameter at
maturity. Both types can be used for pickling if picked
when small.
Design of Plantation
Since cucumber is a vine crop, it requires a lot of space.
Vines can reach 2 to 3 m or more. Field cucumbers can
spread out on the ground. Three seeds of cucumber can be
deposited on the fields manually in each hole at the edge of
the ridge. The final plant distance should be about 40 cm
apart. After germination, extra plants should be removed to
improve better growth. The advantages of direct seeding
cucumbers are that plants develop a better root system, and
it is a less expensive method in comparison to planting.
Water the first day and if there is no rain, every two to three
days until they germinate. Stop vine growth when cucum-
bers reach the top of the bed by picking off the fuzzy end
of the vine. This will leave more energy for fruit develop-
ment.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
189
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Selection of cucumbers for sales and transportation.
Cucumber requires high levels of nutrients. This must
be taken into account in crop rotation. Preceding crops
should leave enough soil nutrients for cucumber. Organic
growers therefore select leguminous crops (e.g. pigeon
pea), beans, or other vegetables as leek that have been
grown after a green manure. The break between two
cucumber crops within the crop rotation is at least 3 years. 
3.6.3. Soil Nutrition and Irrigation
Organic Fertilization
The nutrient requirements of cucumber are about 140 kg
nitrogen, 30 kg phosphorous and 170 kg potassium per ha.
Organic growers “fertilize” the soil, where nutrients are
transformed and made available for uptake by the plants
through microorganisms. This may be obtained through a
high percentage of leguminous crops (beans) or cover crops
(e.g. hairy vetch) in the soil and through the application of
well fermented compost or animal manure. Additionally,
commercial organic fertilizers may be used (e.g. compost,
horn powder) that are available in the growing region. For
example, in a crop rotation after green manure (e.g. hairy
vetch) and during the soil preparations 30 t/ha of compost
or animal manure can be applied. In cucumber planting,
a half hand full of compost for each spot of plants can be
added. 
Irrigation
Cucumber needs enough water for adequate yields. A suitable
system is drop irrigation. Water the plants weekly if it does
not rain. 
3.6.4. Pest and Disease Management
Diseases
Several different diseases attack cucumbers. Most show up
as spots on the upper or lower sides of leaves or on fruit.
A wide crop rotation discourages diseases.
Wherever downy mildew appears, a copper spray
should be considered every 14 days. Copper is considered
as one of the least desirable of organic fungicides because
of its soil toxicity. Therefore, annual application is limited
to 4-8 kg/ha (depending on the organic standard applied).
Never spray in full sun (it will burn the plants). 
Downy Mildew needs wet leaves for propagation.
Preventive measures include the selection of tolerant
varieties, irrigation early in the morning, and improvement
of an early harvest. Use drop irrigation.
Powdery Mildew: preventive measures, selection of
tolerant varieties. This fungus prefers dry conditions.
Direct measures include the application of substances as
fennel oil, soy lecithin, and sulphur sprays (spray only when
cloudy with low concentrations).
Cucumber wilt is spread by cucumber beetles. Remove and
destroy affected plants. Prevent by controlling cucumber
beetles. 
Pests
Organic growers check for Insects as often as possible.
Plant protection nets are used in order to prevent high
infestations. Different insects attack the cucumbers includ-
ing aphids, Mexican bean beetles or cucumber beetles.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
190
Support system for cucumber plantation.
Mexican bean beetles look like a large, orange ladybug
except that they lack the distinctive black and white
ladybug “face”. Their larva are yellow and fuzzy. Damage
to foliage makes it look somewhat like lace. Both adults
and larva are easy to catch as they drop straight down when
disturbed. Cucumber beetles (stripped and spotted)
are yellow, with the appropriate markings. They fly away
if disturbed, and so are harder to catch. For a large
infestation, different products are available, such as:
rotenone, pyrethrum, fatty acids and quassia.
3.6.5. Weed Management
Before seeding cucumber weed curing can be performed.
During the cucumber growth period, the following strate-
gies are applied on an organic farm:
< Organic mulch is a good possibility if available on the
farm or in the region. 
< Plastic mulch is an alternative but rather expensive. 
< Manual hoeing is labor intensive but it is a very 
effective and secure method to regulate weeds. In
manual hoeing, be careful with the superficial roots 
of the cucumber.
< The use of a cover crop (e.g. hairy vetch) that 
competes strongly with weeds is an optimal preventive
measure to avoid weed infection before cucumber 
harvest.
3.6.6. Harvesting and Post Harvest
Handling
The harvest area can be divided, for example, in two sub-areas
that are harvested alternately; this allows smaller picker-
teams and consequently a reduction in production costs.
The following aspects have to be taken into consideration
during harvesting: 
< Harvest frequently, even when the first harvest does not
cover the cost. Pick cucumbers while they are still
small; this will force the vines to produce more allowing
a cucumber to reach full maturity, thus producing full
size mature seeds without halting plant production. 
< In harvest cucumbers that are not well formed when
they reach the desired size, do not wait until they turn
yellow. Yellow cucumbers are over mature and will be
strong flavored and of poor quality. 
< Avoid standing on the plants.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
191
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Organic Vegetables
3.7. Aubergine - Eggplant
Eggplants belong to the family of Solanaceae and originate
in tropical east India. They are grown as annual or plurian-
nual plants. They have a dense branching habit, the branches
being erect or prostrate. As a rule, the annual plant is not more
than one meter high, but in favorable climatic conditions
pluriannual plants also grow up to 3 m high.
The leaves are whole, often slightly lobed, but rarely
serrate. They are of varying sizes ranging from 10 to 30
centimeters in length. Some varieties have thorny stems.
There are at least three widely cultivated species of
eggplant that are easily recognized by their characteristic
flowers and fruits. They are:
< eggplant (Solanum melongena L.)
< bitter tomato with oblong fruits (Solanum 
esculentum L.)
< bitter tomato with globular fruits (Solanum 
incanum L.)
Eggplant is a cold-sensitive vegetable that requires a long
warm season for best yields. The eggplant culture is similar to
that of bell pepper, with transplants being set in the garden
after all danger of frost is past. Eggplants are slightly larger
plants than peppers and are spaced slightly farther apart.
Eggplant requires careful attention for a good harvest.
3.7.1. Ecological Requirements
Eggplants grow in full sunlight, but they tolerate some
shade. They withstand drought quite well, but yields are
low when water is scarce.
A well-drained sandy loam of pH 5.5 to 6.5 with high
organic matter content is ideal for growing eggplant. Fertility
requirements are similar to those of tomato and pepper.
To reduce risk from verticillium wilt and other diseases
avoid using fields in which tomato, pepper, potato, strawberry
or caneberries must be planted.
Temperature
Eggplants grow best at temperatures ranging between
18 and 25°C. 
3.7.2. Organic Aubergine Production
Systems
Eggplant requires a long growing season, so transplants
are most commonly used. They are usually started in the
greenhouse or hotbeds. Sow seeds in shallow flats of soil
mix 9 to 10 weeks before transplanting to the field.
Constant temperatures must be maintained as young plants
are easily checked by cool temperatures or droughts. 
Although eggplants have perfect flowers and, self-
pollination would not appear to be a problem, bees are
required for good pollination. Usually, wild bees are
adequate, but if they are not present, bees should be
provided.
Suitable varieties
The consumers’ preferences are varieties of long egg-
plants, but there are also short and round eggplant varieties
available.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
192
Table 63: 
Optimal Temperature Requirements for Eggplants
Development stage Day temperature °C Night temperature °C
Germination 23-25 23-25
Until to transplant 20-25 18-20
Seedling 18-20 18-20
Planting 20-25 18-20
Final transplanting 18-25
Propagation and Nursery Management
Seeds should be sown in plastic bags, seeding trays or on
the field, in a rather protected place, chosen for the purpose
of growing young plants. Eggplant seeds take between
10 and 25 days to germinate.
Transplanting of the young plants is made as they reach
around 15 cm or the stage of 5-6 leaves. Careful watering-in
is necessary at the time of transplanting because transplants
are very sensitive to water stress. 
Once in the field, the distance in rows for eggplants is
of 0.8 – 1.0 m and between rows it is of 1.2 –1.5 m. If
the chosen planting distances are greater, lifetime and
productivity of each plant is increased.
Design of the Rotation
Due to certain diseases, correct rotation is of great impor-
tance for the eggplant. It should never be planted before or
after the cultivation of other Solanaceae such as tomato or
potato. Eggplants grow well after legumes like green beans
or peas.
Organic eggplants are planted in rotational systems.
Pastures and small grain crops that are grown in rotations
to increase soil structure and organic matter should be
ploughed down several months in advance of planting in
order to avoid problems with cutworm and wireworm.
Organic growers have had very good experiences planting
leguminous cover crops before the eggplants, e.g. hairy
vetch (Vicia villosa).
3.7.3. Soil Nutrition and Irrigation
As a general rule, a regular supply with organic material is
of utmost importance. Green manure is applied to protect
the upper soil layer and to offer nutrients for microorganisms/
plants. On the other hand, compost is applied in order to
maintain and improve long-term fertility of the soil.
Correct fertilization is made in accordance with
different factors such as soil type, growth stage and fertilizer
availability.
Well nourished eggplants will produce more fruits over
a longer period of time, especially in cases were fertilization
was made during flowering of the plant. Eggplants require
higher amounts of phosphorus and of boron (application of
rock phosphate to the compost applied to the eggplant
production site might be appropriate).
Irrigation
Shortly after transplantation of the young plants into the
field, eggplants should be irrigated daily. Later, irrigation is
made every 2 to 4 days, depending on the soil type and
climate.
Soil type does not affect the total amount water needed,
but does dictate frequency of water application. Lighter
soils need more frequent irrigation, but less water applied
per irrigation.
To improve the root development, it is recommendable
to limit irrigation for some weeks after planting if condi-
tions allow. Regular humidity is needed for the nutrient sup-
ply; plant health and fruit quality are very important. The
irrigation can be done by drop irrigation (most com-
monly used) and flood irrigation. Advantages and disad-
vantages of the different irrigation systems have to be eval-
uated carefully before investing in organic eggplant
production; for example: flood irrigation may increase soil
borne diseases, drip irrigation may increase salt concentrations
in the top soil.
Depending from the production site and climatic
conditions, coverage with organic materials (e.g. from
weeding) might help to keep soil moisture. 
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
193
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
3.7.4. Pest and Disease Management
Eggplants are susceptible to physiological disturbances,
diseases and pests. Preventive measure against such
pests and diseases have priority in organic eggplant
production:
< Optimal site selection
< Selection of pest and disease resistant varieties
< Wide rotation (in case of soil borne diseases at least a
four period should be free of eggplant-production)
< Creation of semi-natural habitats and ecological 
compensation areas
< Improve soil fertility and activate soil microbial life
< Balanced nutrient supply
With these preventive measures, most pest and disease
problems can be avoided or reduced. In addition, organic
preparations can be applied (see positive lists); however,
they often are less effective than synthetic products. Therefore
only a combination of preventive and curative methods lead
to a successful organic eggplant production. Attention must
be given to the legal requirements for organic agriculture
(e.g. EU-regulation only allows for a restrictive use of
means like copper, natural insecticides etc.). In the case that
new preparations should be applied, final approval granted
by the responsible certification body is necessary.
Diseases
Diseases of eggplants include verticillium wilt, phomopsis rot,
rizoctonia. Seed treatment can reduce seed rot and damping-off.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
194
Table 64: 
Examples of Eggplants Diseases and Ways to Manage them Organically
Disease Symptoms Preventive measures Direct measures
Verticillium wilt (fungus – Verticillium Young plants appear normal, but become long term rotations with non-related crops that Application of copper 
albo-atrum) stunted as they develop. Severely affected are not susceptible to wilt, and by planting in 
plants turn yellow. The lower foliage wilts and well-drained soil. Cotton gin trash should be  
defoliation occurs. Symptoms continue to avoided or be well composted if used. 
progress until death occurs.
seed rot and damping-off proper growing conditions
Leaf Spot and Fruit Rot (fungus – Phomopsis circular brownish spots on fruit and leaves. Use a three year crop rotation. Application of copper 
vexans) On the fruit, soft, sunken spots become rotted 
and shriveled.
Early Blight (fungus – Alternaria solani) seedling dieback known as collar rot. Later Plants that are well fertilized and irrigated are 
infection is on the foliage beginning on the not as susceptible. Long rotations, weed   
lower part of the plant and developing control, adequate fertilizer, and irrigation  
upward. Spots are characterized by (furrow) will help reduce losses. 
concentric rings that give a target appearance.
Colletotrichum Fruit Rot Lesions on the fruit vary from small spots to Rainfall and overhead irrigation favor disease  
(fungus – Colletotrichum melongenae) one-half inch in diameter. The tissue is sunken, development. 
with an area filled with a flesh-colored ooze 
of fungal spores
Yellows (Tobacco Ring Spot Virus) Yellowing and whitening of upper leaves. Avoid planting in fields where yellowing has  
Later, entire plant becomes yellow and may die occurred and, if warranted, control 
nematodes. The dagger nematode is a known 
vector of the virus.
Pest Insects
Proper rotations and field selection can minimize problems
with insects.
3.7.6. Weed Management
Weed control is important during the first growth stages.
After that the plant achieves enough height and strength to
compete for water and sunlight.
Successful weed regulation in organic eggplant production
is based on a combination of different strategies. Planning
for a diverse crop rotation – especially when involving
cover crops that compete with weeds – is the first and most
important step in organic eggplant production. Organic
growers also pay much attention to sanitation measures that
avoid the introduction of weeds (seeds and propagules).
3.7.7. Harvesting and Post Harvest
Handling
Harvest eggplant fruit when they have developed full bright
color for the variety, but while they are still firm to touch. 
At this stage, the seeds will be young, white, and tender
and the flesh firm and white. As the fruit passes the prime
stage for eating and becomes over-mature, the fruit
surface becomes dull, the seeds harden and darken, and
the flesh becomes spongy. Prompt picking increases
fruit set and yields.
Fruit are cut from the vine about 3 cm above the calyx
or fruit attachment, using a sharp knife or clippers. Fruits
are wiped clean or washed after harvest to enhance their
glossy appearance. Fruits must be handled carefully so that
the spines on the calyx (or other sharp objects) do not
pierce their delicate skin.  
Storage
Eggplants should be stored between 7 and 13°C with a
recommended humidity level of 90-95%. Eggplant fruit
are chilling sensitive at 10°C and below and deteriorate
rapidly at warm temperatures, so they are not adapted to
long storage. Pitting, surface bronzing, and browning of
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
195
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 65: 
Examples of Eggplants Pests and Ways to Manage them Organically
Pest Damage Control
Aphids Different species Suck plant juices; a vector of diseases; creates honey dew; misshapen foliage, Insecticidal soap; release of beneficial insects if they are available (lady beetle, 
flowers and fruits. lacewings etc.); applications of beauvaria bassiana, pyrethrum, rotenone 
Colorado potato beetle Feeds on foliage Application of Bacillus thuringiensis, neem, pyrethrum, and rotenone on larvae 
Leptinotarsa decemlineata
Spider mites Tetranychus spp. Feed on plant juices and cause yellowing and browning of leaves Promote natural enemies like ladybird beetles, green lacewings, predatory mites 
Application of Tephrosia, garlic, neem, pyrethrum, turmeric
Western potato flea beetle Feeds on foliage, cause tiny holes in the leaves. Damage can be severe, applications of neem, pyrethrum, rotenone, sabadilla  
Epitrix subcrinita especially on young plants
Wireworms Limonius spp. Kill young plants, weaken older ones. Tobacco, neem 
Brown, jointed larvae of click 
beetles
Cutworm Cut plants stem Use of parasitic nematodes to soil, spreading wood ashes around the stem, 
moist bran mixed with Bt scattered on soil.
seeds and pulp are symptoms of chilling injury, and loss
of sheen and wilting are symptoms of normal deterio-
ration. Sensitivity of eggplants to chilling differs with
cultivar, maturity, size of fruit, and season of harvest.
Fruit harvested at optimum maturity or in midsummer are
more sensitive than those harvested at an over-mature
stage or in the fall, when the growing temperature is cool.
Thus, eggplants harvested in midsummer can be held
approximately a week at 13°C, whereas those harvested in
fall can be held about 10 days at 9°C.
3.8. Lettuce
Lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.) is a seasonal herb of the family
Compositae. Some varieties form heads and are called
cabbage or head lettuce. The leaves are large, more or less
crinkled, sometimes lobate and varying in color from pale
green to purple. The rosettes of cabbage lettuce are
sometimes very compact.
There are five distinct types of lettuce: leaf (also called
loose-leaf lettuce), Cos (or romaine), crisphead (or
Iceberg), butterhead and stem (also called asparagus
lettuce). 
Leaf lettuce, the most widely adapted type, produces
crisp leaves loosely arranged on the stalk. It is the most
widely planted and consumed salad vegetable. Cos or
romaine forms an upright, elongated head; crisphead
varieties, the iceberg types, are adapted to northern con-
ditions and require the most care. The butterhead varieties
are generally small, loose-heading types that have tender,
soft leaves with a delicate sweet flavor and stem lettuce
forms an enlarged seeds stalk.
3.8.1. Ecological Requirements
Lettuce responds well to a moist, rich soil, full exposure to
sun and cool weather conditions. It is a typical plant of the
temperate climate.
Temperature
It is grown everywhere where the average temperature
remains between 10°C and 20°C. In a hot climate, head
building can be disturbed. Generally, lettuces would
benefit from cool nights, which tend to enhance its mild
sweet flavor; whereas high temperatures in general (above
25° C) tend to produce strong flavors (bitterness). Certain
semi-head and leaf lettuce are more tolerant of high
temperatures and do not develop strong flavors.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
196
Soil
Sandy peat and mucks, deep black sandy loams and loams
are the most suitable types of soil. Lettuce is slightly tolerant
to acidic soils, but ideal pH ranges between 6.0 and 6.8.
Good moisture holding capacity with good drainage is
important, especially for heading types. Soils that compact
easily or are compacted can adversely affect head lettuce
growth. For successful head lettuce production, soils should
be managed to reduce compaction as much as possible. In
the case of direct seeding, a fine soil texture support a
good germination.
3.8.2. Organic Lettuce Production
Systems
Suitable Varieties
Although mostly adapted to colder climates, there are summer
and winter varieties which can be used in each of the seasons.
Propagation and Nursery Management
Lettuce should be sown into seeding trays so that young
plants may grow strong enough for the field. Transplanting
occurs when plants have 4-6 leaves, usually after 25 – 30
days. To get stronger and bigger lettuce, seedlings can be
covered with a fine layer of substrate during its growth on
the trays. Because of the danger of soaking small plants, it
is not advisable to irrigate the trays one day before
transplanting occurs. 
Raised beds are ideal for lettuce production. They help
prevent damage from soil compaction and flooding. They
also improve air flow around the plants resulting in reduced
disease incidence.
Seeding
Seeding depths is about ? to ? inch. In case of heavier soils,
less depth is recommended. Germination will take place 3-5
days under good conditions. Direct seeding needs some
thinning 10 to 14 days after the seeding day.
Transplanting
Normally, transplanting is done manually or semi-manual-
ly with planters who ride on platforms close to the ground
setting seedling blocks in the prepared furrows.
Depending on the type of lettuce, seedlings are planted
in smaller or larger distances in and between the row.
3.8.3. Soil Nutrition and Irrigation
Fertilization
Liming is made necessary where soils have a low pH.
Previous fertilization with manure or organic compost and
phosphorus, 8-10 days before transplanting young plants,
will also aid in a better development.
Conditions for the Nutrient Availability
Because of its small roots, nutrient availability for lettuce is
more difficult than for other species. About 80% of the growth
occurs 3-4 weeks before harvest. This is the most critical
period. During the same period, a physiological disorder called
tipburn occurs most often. Tipburn is said to be linked to an
undersupply of Calcium. Fertile and well balanced soil is the
best precondition to ensure a satisfactory nutrient supply.
Irrigation
Lettuce requires a constant supply of moisture for the
whole growing period. In the later stages of crop develop-
ment, a good supply is of particular importance. However,
conditions that are too dry or too wet lead to heads of less
quality. 
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
197
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 66: 
Distance between and in the Row 
for Plantation of Lettuce
Distance in the row Distance between the rows
Lettuce 0,25 m 0,25 – 0,30 m
As many as 8-10 irrigations and 10-12 inches of water
per acre may be necessary depending on seasonal variation,
variety and planting date. Soil type does not affect the
amount of total water needed, but does dictate frequency of
water application. Lighter soils need more frequent water
applications, but less water applied per application.
Sprinkler irrigation in lettuce is widespread.
3.8.4. Pest and Disease Management
Preventive measure against such pests and diseases have
priority in organic lettuce production: 
< Optimal site selection
< Selection of pest and disease resistant varieties
< Wide rotation (to avoid soil borne diseases)
< Creation of semi-natural habitats and ecological 
compensation areas
< Improve soil fertility and activate soil microbial life
< Balanced nutrient supply
< Intercropping of different vegetables (e.g. Basil as
repellent against Aphids)
With these preventive measures most pest and disease
problems can be avoided or reduced. In addition, organic
preparations can be applied (see positive lists); however, they
often are less effective than synthetic products. Therefore
only a combination of preventive and curative methods lead
to a successful organic lettuce production. Attention must be
given to the legal requirements for organic agriculture (e.g.
EU-regulation for organic agriculture only allows for a
restrictive use of means like copper, natural insecticides etc.).
In the case that new preparations should be applied, approval
granted by the responsible certification body is necessary.
Disease
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
198
Table 67: 
Examples of Lettuce Diseases and Ways to Manage them Organically
Disease Symptoms Preventive measures Direct measures
Viruses (mosaic and others) Rottening of leaves; bad formation of leaves; Control insects that act as vectors to these Remove infected plants 
small plants diseases
S. minor (lettuce drop); S. sclerotiorum Leaves wilt and fall from the head in succession. Reduce humidity beneath and between the Coniothyrium minitans and Trichoderma spp.  
The heart may remain erect, but becomes a foliage (wider rows, pruning of old leaves); Only parasites that have shown good effects   
wet, slimy mass against S. Sclerotium
Botrytis Tip-end rot Proper aeration (field/storage room) Remove infected plants (field and storage room); 
application of antagonistic fungus Trichoderma 
harzianum seems to be effective (not applied 
in practise until now)
Septoria Copper applications
Pest Insects
3.8.5. Harvesting and Post Harvest
Handling
Because lettuce is so fragile, it is handled as little as possible.
Most fresh market lettuce is hand cut and trimmed, and
placed in cardboard cartons in the field. It is then trucked
to a central area for vacuum cooling. In a few areas it is not
vacuum cooled, but placed in a cooler for temporary
holding until trucked to market. No lettuce is washed
before it gets to the store, but some may be hydro cooled or
hydro-vacuum cooled. 
Lettuce and other leafy items must be kept clean, and
free of soil and mud. A stronger bitter taste and toughness
develops if harvest is delayed or if crop is over- mature, and
then the product becomes unmarketable.
Lettuce is extremely perishable and needs to be handled
delicately, and marketed rapidly. Lettuce may be held tem-
porarily at 0°C and 90-95% relative humidity for several days.
Head lettuce is harvested when the heads are of good
size (about 2 lbs), well formed and solid. If the plants are
wet with rain or dew the leaves are more brittle and break
more easily. Leave three undamaged wrapper leaves on
each head. Put 24 heads in rigid cardboard containers in the
field and avoid bruising. Grade heads according to size,
pack in cartons (vacuum cooling is mandatory) for long
shipments. Leaf, butterhead and cos types are cut, trimmed
and tied into compact bundles before placing in cartons.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
199
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 68: 
Examples of Lettuce Pests and Ways to Manage them Organically
Pest Damage Control
Aphids, primarily Green Natural enemies, some of which are specific and others that are general to all  
peach aphid Myzus persicae aphids. Most effective e.g. in Hawaii are the predatory syphid maggots, 
Allograpta sp., lady beetles and parasitic wasps. Other effective parasite is 
Diaretus chenopodiaphidis Ashmead; In urgent cases tobacco applications;  
Cucumber beetles including Attack seedlings and feed on foliage Use of White Tephrosia (Tephrosia candida) in form of mulch and/or aqueous  
Western spotted cucumber extract (20g of leaves in 100 ml of water); Tephrosia plants contains strong fish 
beetle Diabrotica poisons which may also affect human health. 
undecimpunctata
Cutworms and Armyworms Feed on stems and leaves. Usually in soil during the day Cultural Methods: Plowing one month before planting to turn caterpillars/larvae 
to the surface; hand-picking at night
Loopers, including Alfalfa Bacillus thuringiensis
looper Autographa californica 
Slugs, Several species Hot chili preparations (aqueous extract)
Land mollusks feed on foliage and leave slime trails Sweet Basil leaf extract
Wireworms Limonius spp. Intercropping of garlic
3.9. Onions
Onions (Allium cepa L. var cepa) are originally from the
middle Asia. They are related to garlic, asparagus and other
crops of the Liliaceae family. Onions, with their different
possibilities of utilization (fresh, dry, and processed etc.)
are one of the most important vegetables worldwide. 
There are two basic types of onions; bulb-forming
onions produce a single bulb in a season. Bulb-forming
onions include storage onions and “sweet” onions. The
difference between storage and fresh onions is that storage
onions keep for a longer period of time.
Onions for storage generally have a darker color, thicker
skins, and a more pungent flavor than fresh onions. Storage
onions can be grown from seed, onion sets, or transplants.
Perennial onions produce clusters of small onions.
Perennial onions include potato onions, bunching onions,
Egyptian onions, and shallots. Fresh onions don’t keep well
and are best eaten soon after they are harvested. They
are commonly referred to as sweet onions.
3.9.1. Ecological Requirements
Optimal soils are middle heavy soils, with a neutral pH and
good infiltration that permits the percolation of the water.
Onions like warm temperatures and less than 750 mm
precipitation. They grow well in different temperature
ranges and are suitable in northern, subtropical and tropical
climates. Typical productions regions are dry areas, with
warm temperature and high sunlight.
3.9.2. Organic Onion Production
Systems
Suitable Varieties
It is recommendable to use fast growing varieties that will
shorten the susceptible period for diseases.
Propagations and Nursery Management
Onions can be grown from seeds, small dormant onions
called “sets”, or onion transplants: 
< Set onion: seeds 90 kg per ha, row distance 20 cm, 
2 - 3 cm deep. Harvesting when the set onions have 
a size of 15-20 mm diameter. Store them dry until
planting
< Plantlets: 4-5 seeds per pot in 4cm cubes or tray with
20-50 cm3 pots; ready to plant with 3 leaves.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
200
Organic Onions
Sawing or planting in the field:
The size of the onion mainly depends on the sawing/planting
distance:
With low sawing or planting density, you will harvest big
onions.
< Direct sawing: 4-6 kg seeds per ha;
< Planting set onions: 800 - 1000 kg per ha, with 
5 to 7 cm distance in the row.
Crop Rotation
Organic onions are planted in a crop rotation schedule. It is
not recommendable to plant onions in the same soil for
more than one season. Onions can be planted only one time
within five years in the crop rotation. This is important in
order to avoid diseases. Previous crops can be potatoes,
crucifers, field beans, but not carrots or celery. Onions have
a good effect as a preceding crop. Onion organic matter
residue is about 1 ton per ha, which contains approximately
25 kg of nitrogen, 10 kg of phosphor, 35 kg of potassium.
Crops that can be cultivated after onions in the same year
include, for example, spinach. 
3.9.3. Soil Nutrition and Irrigation
Fertilization 
Onions don’t require high nutrient supply. A good potassium-
nitrogen relationship is important in order to avoid diseases
and guarantee good storage-quality. Planting cover crops
(e.g. hairy vetch) before onion crops in many cases pro-
vides enough nutrients for onions. Suitable organic fertilizers
are well fermented compost (15 to 20 ton per ha). Fresh animal
manures are not suitable because they increase infestations
with pest insects (onion fly).
Irrigation
Sufficient water supply is important for the development of
onions. Water slowly and deeply to produce healthy onions. 
3.9.4. Pest and Disease Management
Disease
Diseases caused by fungi are common in onion production.
Frequent diseases are downy mildew (Peronospera destructor),
different Botrytis diseases (Botrytis aclada, B. cinerea) and
white rot of onion (Sclerotium cepivorum).
Growing onions in good aerated soil and within an
optimal crop rotation are ideal preventive measures to
reduce the possibility of infestations. Organic growers
mainly plant onions at the end of the crop rotation because
they have low nutrient requirements. Before the next onion
crop, a 4-5 year period free of Liliaceae are necessary.
Additional preventive applications of substances that
make plants resistant to diseases and improve protection
against diseases (e.g. extracts of herbs). 
Pests
Trips can cause problems to organic onions. Cultural
measures are: crop rotation; deep plowing (20 cm) after the
harvest to destroy the larvae living in the soil; trips do not
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
201
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Onions intercropping with papaya.
like wet plants, so irrigation can also slow down trips. In
case of high infestation pressure rotenone and pyrethrum
may be applied (see positive lists of organic standards).
Control in these plant extracts is often poor, and as a draw-
back, the beneficial organisms will be harmed.
Organic growers protect their onions from onion fly
(Della antiqua) and leek moth (Acrolepia assectella) with a
plant protection net. For large plots, this method may be too
expensive; therefore it is mostly used for small plots and
mainly for fresh onions. If the pressure of leek moth is high,
neem spraying will have an effect.
3.9.5. Weed Management
Onions are not very competitive due to the long period of
germination and the poor cover of the soil. Therefore,
organic onions should be grown in areas with low weed-
pressure and in the rotation after a cover crop. Furthermore,
onions are shallow rooted and any cultivation should be
cautious to avoid damage to the bulbs or roots. Cultivation
should be shallow, without bringing excessive soil to the
plants. Due to these conditions, other recommendable steps
in organic onion production include:
< Starting with bulb-onions (dormant onions);
< Weeds should be controlled before planting the
onions; 
< Mechanical weed regulation (hoeing) should start at
the early development of the weeds; 
< Take special care of weeds that germinate in latest
stages of the crop. This can cause problems during the
harvesting;
< Mulching can also help control weeds.
3.9.6. Harvesting and Post Harvest
Handling
Fresh Onions
Fresh sweet onions can be stored for several weeks in a
cool, dark place. They can be stored in the refrigerator, but
not in plastic bags. This will inhibit air circulation and
promote rotting of onions.
Storage
The ripe period for storage onions is reached when at least
75% of the crop populations has been laid down. Too early
a clearing can cause problems during storage. Too late a
clearing can cause the shell to drop away and induce sprout
out. After the harvest, the onions will store better if they are
dried for a week outdoors. Leave tops on bulbs during dry-
ing. After drying, cut tops within 3 cm of bulb. The onions
can be picked up manually or with a full harvester. Onions are
stored in dry and good ventilated stores. Storage tempera-
tures should be below 30°C. 
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
202
Onion fields.
3.10. Radish
Radish (Raphanus sativus L.) belongs to the Brassicaceae
or mustard family. It is a very old crop plant cultivated in
Egypt at the time of the Pharaohs, as well as in ancient
Roman and Greece.
Numerous varieties are grown, classified according to
the shape and color of the root or the growing season. The
ancient black radish is seldom cultivated nowadays. The
most widely used varieties are the white and/or red radish;
rapidly maturing plants are always eaten young and raw. In
Chinese and Japanese cooking radishes are generally
cooked, eaten in soups, pickled (Kimchi) and dried. Here
oriental types, such as the elongated and round daikon
radishes (or Long White Radish) are important staple
foods. In India, mourgi radish (rat-tailed radish), grown for
its seed pods, is very common (seeds of radish are sprouted).
Specific varieties of oil-seed radish also exist.
3.10.1 Ecological Requirements
Given their short biological cycle (25 to 90 days depends
on the variety) and the selection of an appropriate
planting period, radishes may be grown in a wide range
of environments.
Temperature
Radish prefers cool and not too sunny days, and grows best
in spring and autumn. Even light frosts will be tolerated.
The optimum temperature is between 10-20 ° C. Radish
seed will not start to germinate with soil temperatures
above 35° C.
Therefore, in (sub-) tropical areas, the rainy/winter
season seems to be the preferred cultivation time. High
temperatures lead to the development of small tops and
roots will become pithy after reaching maturity rapidly, and
a strong flavor will be produced. 
Soil
Radishes need light, well-drained and highly fertile soils for easy
root expansion. If the soil is crusty, roots become misshapen.
Light mineral soils or muck soils are preferred but radishes may
be grown on a wide range on other soils too (like their ancestor,
the wild radish, which is grown in nearly all types of soil).
Daikon radish requires deep, friable soil for best quality roots.
Commercial cultivation must take into consideration roots that
need to be washed, which will be more difficult in heavier soils. 
Due to the fact that the crop develops very rapidly and
the root system is not very extensive, the most favorable
conditions for root activity should be attained by thorough
seed-bed preparation and shallow cultivation. 
Soil pH should be maintained about 6.5 or higher by
adding lime (dolomitic lime). In spite of the fact that radish will
tolerate slightly acidic soils, pH should not go below 5.5.
3.10.2 Organic Radish Production
Systems
Design of the Rotation
As for all members of the mustard family, the selection of
the correct production site is of utmost importance:
No crucifer crop, or related weed, should have been
present in the field for at least 3-4 years (members of the
mustard family include cabbage, cauliflower, broccoli,
kale, kohlrabi, Brussels sprouts, Chinese cabbage, all mus-
tards, turnips, rutabagas, radishes etc.; Cruciferous weeds
include wild radish, wild mustards etc.). Also, crucifer
plant waste should not have been dumped on these fields.
It is well known that radishes will thrive under close
planting or as an intercrop between rows of later-maturing
plants. In some cases, radish can be used as a companion
crop (e.g. intercropping is recommended with cucumbers
against cucumber beetle). 
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
203
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Direct Seeding
Radish is sown directly in rows. Seeding depth is 10-20
mm, whereas a distance between the rows of 20 cm. 40 to
60 plants per meter is desirable. Depending on the per-
centage of germinated seeds, thinning out may be required
in order to avoid high plant densities (which will lead to less
quality roots). Germination will start 4-8 days after seed-
ing. Sow every seven to 10 days in order to ensure a con-
tinuous supply of radishes. Of course, bigger varieties like
Daikoon need another row spacing.
3.10.3 Soil Nutrition and Irrigation
Fertilization
The application of animal manure (and compost) some
weeks before sowing helps to build up the water holding
capacity and balance the nutrient supply. In the same context,
correct positioning in the crop rotation is important in order
to ensure a good nutrient supply from the early beginnings
of the growth period. About 15t/ha organic manure can be
applied, attention has to be given to an oversupply of nitrogen
(e.g. with poultry manure) as this could lead to excessive
top growth and bad qualities. 
Irrigation
Keeping the short production period in mind, continuous
growth and subsequently continuous water supply is needed.
Quick growing can be ensured by irrigation for optimum
growth and tenderness. For best root quality, irrigate to
maintain uniform and vigorous growth. In addition to irri-
gation, a well prepared soil enriched with organic material is
important to guarantee satisfactory water holding capacity. 
Of course, the long white radish (Daikoon) needs more
water because of the longer growth period (60-70 days) in
comparison to the bunching types (with 25-35 days).
Soil type does not affect the amount of total water needed,
but does dictate frequency of water application. Lighter
soils need more frequent water applications, but less water
applied per application. 
3.10.4 Pest and Disease Management
Preventive measure against such pests and diseases have
priority in organic radish production: 
< Optimal site selection
< Selection of pest and disease resistant varieties
< Wide rotation (to avoid soil borne diseases)
< Creation of semi-natural habitats and ecological 
compensation areas
< Improve soil fertility and activate soil microbial life
< Balanced nutrient supply
With these preventive measures, most pest and disease
problems can be avoided or reduced. In addition, organic
preparations can be applied (see positive lists); however, they
often are less effective than synthetic products. Therefore,
only a combination of preventive and curative methods leads
to successful organic radish production. Attention must be
given to the legal requirements for organic agriculture (e.g.
EU-regulation for organic agriculture only allows for a
restrictive use of means like copper, natural insecticides etc.).
In the case that new preparations should be applied, approval
granted by the responsible certification body is necessary.
Disease
Due to the short cultivation period only a few diseases cause
economic losses. One of them is black rot, a fungus disease.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
204
Table 69: 
Examples of Radish Diseases and Ways 
to Manage them Organically 
Disease Symptoms Preventive Measures
Black Rot Dark irregular patches on the root Good soil drainage as well as crop 
rotation (3-4 years)
White Rust White pustules on the leaves, stems Crop Rotation (3-4 years); Separation
and flowers of young and old crops; Destruction 
of infested crop residues;
Pest Insects
The most important pests are cabbage white butterfly,
aphids and diamondback moth, which also attack cauli-
flower and cabbage (or other crucifers).
3.10.5 Weed Management
Because of the short growing period and the fact that
radishes are grown in smaller areas, weed control is not a
severe problem. Good land preparation before seeding
(encourage the weeds to germinate before sowing) is
the best way to avoid problems. Furthermore, inter-row
cultivation of other crops (green manure) can be done
to suppress weed growth as well as mulch with organic
materials. However, in case of severe problems, manual
weeding is necessary to avoid any damage to the radish
crop.
3.10.6 Harvesting and Post Harvest
Handling
All harvesting is done by hand. Red radishes are pulled and
tied in bunches. The bunches are washed and should be
cooled immediately after harvest for best shelf life.
Radishes should be kept moist and cool at all times to
prevent dehydration. Daikon radish may be mechanically
undercut before harvest and can be processed (for dried and
pickled radish).
Radishes tend to wilt. Therefore, harvest them in the
cold and keep them cool and moist. In the storage room
temperature should be around 0°C and a the relative
humidity around 90%.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
205
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 70: 
Examples of Radish Pests and Ways to Manage them Organically
Pest Damage Control
Aphids, including Cabbage Cabbage and turnip aphids are gray mealy plant lice forming colonies on Support of natural enemies like Lady Bird Beetles  
aphid Brevicoryne brassicae foliage or in heads or in buds 
Turnip aphid Hyadaphis 
erysimi Green peach aphid 
Myzus persicae
Cutworms and Armyworms Cultural Methods: Plowing one month before planting to turn caterpillars/larvae 
including Black cutworm to the surface; hand-picking at night for removal of larvae; Natural insecticides:   
(Agrotis ipsilon) Derris, Rotenon; Bacillus thuringiensis
Diamondback moth (Plutella Small, pale yellowish-green larvae with erect black hairs. Eats holes in foliage. Planting of trap crops (collards) between cabbage rows and/or around the 
xylostella) cabbage field; Sexual pheromones; Spraying of B. thuringiensis; Larval parasitoid 
Diadegma semiclausum;
Flea beetles including Frequent attacks and destroys seedling plants. Intercropping with garlic; Early season trap crop along the field; garlic mixture  
cabbage flea beetle with water; Neem and Derris; 
Phyllotreta cruciferae
Wireworms Ctenicera and Intercropping of garlic 
Limonius spp.
3.11. Spinach
Spinach (Spinacia oleracea L.) is of little importance in the
tropics and subtropics because it grows well only under
cool weather conditions. Better adapted to warm weather
conditions are vine spinach (Basella sp.) and New Zealand
spinach (Tetragonia expansa).
Malabar spinach, also known as Vine spinach, Indian
spinach, Malabar Nightshade, Pasali and Pu-tin-choi, is a
regular food item in tropical Africa and southeast Asia,
where it originated. It is a low growing plant that sends out
runners, with thick, dark green leaves. 
New Zealand spinach is a seasonal herb of the family
Tetragoniaceae, native to Asia and commonly used in South
America. It is a prostrate, creeping vegetable and looks like
a many-branched trailing plant. It has typical pale green
leaves, fleshy, oval to lanceolate in shape.
All the foliage is edible and is consumed as a leafy
vegetable, in sauces or as a side dish.
The plant grows from seed. It thrives in full sunlight,
and is very productive in well-watered soils rich in organic
manure. 
3.11.1. Ecological Requirements
Soil
Muck soils provide needed organic matter and high, uniform,
moisture content. Sandy soils or sandy loam soils may be
used, especially in the case of New Zealand spinach. A
pH of 6.2 to 6.9 is optimum with a pH between 6.5 and
7.0 being ideal for good growth. In general, all types of
spinach grow very poorly at pH levels below 6.0.
Temperature
Recent research indicates that a temperature of 15-20°C is
ideal for optimal growth.
3.11.2. Organic Spinach Production
Systems
Suitable Varieties
The use of proper varieties is very important. For spinach
(Spinacia oleracea L.), slow-growing, slow-bolting (slow
seed-stalk development as day length increases) varieties
are used for late spring and summer harvest, while fast-
growing (these tend to be fast bolting), vigorous varieties
should be used for fall, winter, and early spring harvest.
Although long days and increasing temperature predispose
spinach to bolting, bolting is increased by exposure of
young plants to low temperatures.
Disease resistance in spinach varieties is developed
for the season to which the variety is adapted. With proper
varieties, spinach production for the fresh market is possible
almost year-round.
Flat, semisavoy, and savoy leaf varieties are used for
different markets. The flat and some of the semisavoy varieties
are used for processing. All three types are used for fresh
market with semisavoy and savoy types predominating.
Spinach varieties may also be classified as prostrate,
semi-erect, and upright. The savoy types are not suitable in
organic farming for processing. In conventional farming,
plant growth regulators may sometimes be applied before
harvest to cause a more upright leaf growth and reduce the
risk of soil contamination. This is important due to diffi-
culties in removing soil from savoy leaves during washing
and processing. 
Malabar spinach (Basella spp.) has three species which
are common: B. rubra, B. alba, and B. cordifolia, which are
red stem, green stem, and heart-shaped leaf forms, respec-
tively. This is a warm-season crop that produces aggressive
vines that may reach 3 to 4.5 m in length. The succulent
leaves and tender shoots are marketed and used in the same
way as spinach.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
206
New Zealand spinach (Tetragonia expansa) is a
tender annual with fleshy stems and leaves, resembling
spinach. It has very limited commercial demand, but
because of its adaptability to hot summer temperatures
and drought, it is popular in warmer climates. In Brazil
there is one adapted variety that is sold, called New
Zealand (same name).
Propagation and Nursery Management
All types of spinach (Spinacia oleraceae L., Basella spp.
and Tetragonia expansa) can be sown directly into the field,
although soil moisture and temperature should be ideal. It
is also of great importance that the right spacing in and
between rows is followed (see table 71). Because of their
toughness, seeds should be soaked in warm water for
24 hours before being planted. In cases where seeding
trays are used, seedlings should be transplanted as soon
as they reach the 3-5 leaf stage.
In the tropics and sub-tropics spinach (Spinacia
oleraceae) can be planted in autumn; in colder regions at
higher altitudes, above 800 m, spinach thrives all year long.
Because of the heat, bolting before the leaves are large
enough to consume is a very common problem.
New Zealand spinach (Tetragonia expansa) may
germinate slowly and irregularly, but once the plants are
established, they drop seeds and start new ones.
3.11.3. Soil Nutrition and Irrigation
Fertilization
In general, decisions on the level and type of fertilization
needed should be based on the results of soil analysis and field
history. Soil nutrition has to be regarded as a long term invest-
ment. Tropical soils are known as rather acidic soils, with low
pH and high aluminum content. In these cases, spinach
growth requires correction with calcium.
Fertilization after each harvest is useful for a better
re-growth of the leaves.
Irrigation
Spinach is a quick-growing, shallow-rooted crop that is not
tolerant to water stress. Maintain adequate moisture by
frequent irrigation when necessary but avoid irrigation
practices that splash soil onto the leaves or damage them.
New Zealand spinach is very resistant to heat and dry
soil, but achieves best results when irrigated.
3.11.4. Pest and Disease Management
Preventive measure against such pests and diseases have
priority in organic spinach production: 
< Optimal site selection
< Selection of pest and disease resistant varieties
< Wide rotation (to avoid soil borne diseases)
< Creation of semi-natural habitats and ecological 
compensation areas
< Improve soil fertility and activate soil microbial life
< Balanced nutrient supply
< Intercropping of different vegetables
With these preventive measures, most pest and disease
problems can be avoided or reduced. In addition, organic
preparations can be applied (see positive lists); however,
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
207
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 71: 
Distance between and in the Row 
for the Planting of Spinach
Type Distance in the Row Distance between the Rows
Spinacia oleraceae 0.3 m
Tetragonia expansa 0.4 – 0.5 m 0.3 – 0.4 m
Basella spp. 0.2 – 0.4 m
they often are less effective than synthetic products. Therefore
only a combination of preventive and curative methods lead
to a successful organic spinach production. Attention must
be given to the legal requirements for organic agriculture
(e.g. EU-regulation for organic agriculture only allows for a
restrictive use of means like copper, natural insecticides etc.).
In the case that new preparations should be applied, approval
granted by the responsible certification body is necessary.
Disease
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
208
Table 72: 
Examples of Spinach Diseases and Ways to Manage them Organically
Disease Symptoms Preventive measures Direct measures
Cercospora leaf spot Cercospora beticola Fungal disease which causes small gray spots Ideal management of irrigation; respect Application of fungicides based on copper   
with red or brownish-red edges on leaves. sowing season; Crop rotation 
The infected tissue drops, leaving a perforated 
surface
Mildew (Oidium) White spots on the upper side of the leaf lead Ideal management of irrigation; high air Application of fungicides based on copper  
to its death in later stages humidity promotes dissemination after the 
primary infection
Alternaria Dry and brown spots with concentric circles Application of fungicides based on copper 
and bright edges appear on older leaves
Pest Insects
Proper rotations and field selection can minimize problems
with insects.
Table 73: 
Examples of Spinach Pests and Ways to Manage them Organically
Pest Damage Control
Aphids, including Bean aphid Suck sap Insecticidal soap; garlic extract; milk with ashes; applications of B. bassiana;   
Aphis fabae rotenone; nicotine.
Black plant louse colonizes foliage Applications of nicotine
Green peach aphid Suck sap of leaves Insecticidal soap; milk with ashes; nicotine 
Myzus persicae
Melon aphid Aphis gossypii Suck sap of roots; death of young plants Applications of nicotine
Cucumber beetles including Feeds on foliage Application of rotenone 
Western spotted cucumber 
beetle Diabrotica 
undecimpunctata
Cutworms Agrotis sp. feed on the leaves for the first 1 or 2 weeks then on the roots and at night they young caterpillars feeding on leaves can be controlled with preparations of derris, 
emerge and feed on the upper parts pyrethrum or tobacco. The moths can be caught with light traps. A mixture of 
wood ash and chalk on the soil reduces the activity of the older caterpillars. 
Armyworms (caterpillars of can completely destroy young plants, feed on leaves Release of beneficial insects if they are available; applications of Bt on larvae,  
various moths, most of them superior oil. Spraying of insect-controlling plant preparations like neem, tobacco,  
belonging to the genera garlic-pepper extract. 
Spodoptera
Lygus bugs Lygus spp. sucking plant juices of young seedlings spray pyrethrum preparations
Wireworms Limonius spp. Intercropping of garlic
Loopers, including Alfalfa Intercropping of onions, radish; Bacillus thuringiensis 
looper Autographa californica
3.11.5. Weed Management
3.11.6. Harvesting and Post Harvest
Handling
Spinach for processing yields are approximately 8 to 10
tons per acre.
For processing - harvest before plants are too large or
begin to bolt (usually when about 40 cm tall). Sometimes a
second cut is made for a chopped pack after suitable
re-growth has developed. 
At harvest, the first cut is made 14 - 18 cm above the
ground in order to eliminate as much stem and petiole as
possible from the whole leaf pack. This also is done to
avoid as many of the yellow or old leaves as possible. At the
second cutting, small disks are used to cut away these yellow
or old leaves and to remove some soil away from the crown
to facilitate harvest. Depending on temperature, and plant
density, 3-4 weeks are needed between the first and second
cutting to obtain adequate re-growth. 
A number of mechanical harvesters are available for
processing spinach.
For fresh market - plants should be dry and slightly wilted
to prevent petiole breakage. When harvesting by hand, cut
above the crown or soil line and bunch. Care should be taken
to exclude leaves that are dirty with soil or are yellow.
Bunched spinach must be handled extremely carefully to
reduce breakage of plants or bunches during bunching,
washing and packaging.
Specialty leaf lettuces and spinach for bag mixes have
usually been hand harvested, but mechanical harvesters for
this purpose are now available. 
Freshly cut spinach is highly perishable. Care is needed
in keeping loads from overheating. Loads must be cooled if
they are to be transported long distances to the processing
or packing plant. 
Keep spinach at 0°C and 95 to 100% relative humidity.
Spinach is very perishable; hence, it can be stored for only
10 to 14 days. The temperature should be as close to 0°C
as possible because spinach deteriorates rapidly at higher
temperatures. Crushed ice should be placed in each package
for rapid cooling and for removing the heat of respiration.
Top ice is also beneficial. Hydro-cooling and vacuum cooling
are other satisfactory cooling methods for spinach.
Most spinach for fresh market is prepackaged in per-
forated plastic bags to reduce moisture loss and physical
injury. Controlled atmospheres with 10 to 40 percent carbon
dioxide and 10% oxygen have been found to be beneficial
in retarding yellowing and maintaining quality.
Packing
Spinach is commonly packaged in 20 to 22-lb cartons
packed 2 dozen each; or 7.5 to 8-lb cartons of 12 film bags,
each 10 oz; or 20 to 25-lb bushel crates. 
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
209
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 74: 
Direct Measures for Weed-regulation in Organic
Spinach Production
Measure Advantages Disadvantages
Manual hoeing Reduces cutworms More work (high costs) 
Dead mulch No need of hoeing Costs a lot of time to prepare the 
mulch if cutting machines are 
not available (most cases)
3.12. Sweet Corn
Sweet corn (Zea mays var. rugosa) has specific environ-
mental and cultural needs that must be met for the plant
to produce marketable yields. Corn is a warm-season
crop that requires high temperatures for optimum germi-
nation and rapid growth. Climatic conditions, such as
drought or flooding, can reduce yields and cause small,
deformed ears.
Corn is wind-pollinated and should be planted in
blocks of at least 4 rows for good pollination to occur.
Sweet corn can also cross-pollinate with other types of
corn. If sweet corn is planted downwind of popcorn or
field corn, kernels will be starchy instead of sweet. Cross-
pollination between white and yellow cultivars will change
the colors of the kernels. Extra-sweet and standard cul-
tivars also should not be planted near each other or at the
same time. To prevent cross-pollination, sweet corn should
be separated from different types of corn by at least 300 m;
different types or cultivars of corn should be planted at
least 1 month apart, or cultivars with different maturity
dates should be planted.
3.12.1. Ecological Requirements
Soil and Climatic Requirements
Sweet corn grows best in a well-drained soil with a pH of
5.5 to 7.0. In choosing a site for corn production, heavy clay
soils with poor drainage and areas subject to flooding
should be avoided. Dry, sandy sites should only be used if
irrigation is available. Soil pH can be raised by incorporating
ground limestone. Because soil reaction with lime is slow,
limestone should be incorporated early, preferably before
corn sowing. 
3.12.2. Organic Sweet Corn
Production System
Suitable Varieties
Variety selection is an important consideration in sweet
corn production and includes factors such as sweetness,
days to maturity, seed color, size, yield potential, and toler-
ance to pests. 
Three types of sweet corn are available: standard (su),
sugary-enhanced (se), and super-sweet (sh2). The su type is
the old-fashioned sweet corn with which we are all familiar.
It must be consumed quickly after harvest, or the sugars
rapidly turn to starch. The se types contain more sugar than
the su type and, if cooled, will remain sweet for several days
after harvest. The sh2 type also contains more sugar than the
su type but converts very little sugar to starch. If properly
cooled, a sh2 variety will remain sweet for 7 to 10 days after
harvest. Appropriate selection from available varieties suitable
to local conditions has to be strongly taken into account. 
Design of Plantation
Fresh corn seed should always be used, especially for super-
sweet cultivars. Standard and sugary-enhanced corn seeds
should be planted about 3 cm deep in moist, heavy soil; 3 to
6 m deep in very light, sandy soils. Super-sweets need to be
planted shallow -only about 1 inch deep. 
If large field of sweet corn are being planted, especially
se and sh2 varieties, purchase of a precision seeder might be
cost worthy to reduce seed costs and labor costs for thinning.
Depending on the cultivation equipment available, seeds are
usually planted 13 to 16 cm apart in rows 75 to 100 cm apart.
Once the plants are well established, they should be thinned
to stand 20 to 30 cm apart in the row. Sweet corn may be
planted in a 3-year rotation with pumpkins and beans.
Organic sweet corn growers use cover crops to increase
organic matter, improve soil tilt, and reduce erosion. Some
cover crop possibilities are the hairy vetch, clover and alfal-
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
210
fa. To ensure the nitrogen-fixing capabilities of the legume,
a grower should inoculate the legumes with the proper bac-
teria before seeding. 
To conserve space, sweet corn is often intercropped
with vine crops, such as cucumbers, pumpkins, and
muskmelons. The vines can be trained to grow between the
corn plants. An alternative to intercropping within the same
field is strip-cropping. In this system, two or three different
crops are grown in strips, commonly 2 to 6 rows wide. 
An ideal rotation plan for organic sweet corn might look
like this:
< year 1: legume cover crop, or a legume-grass pasture;
< year 2: sweet corn;
< years 3 and 4: other vegetables.
Long rotations like the above example are desirable
because grass and legume sod crops are “soil builders”,
whereas row crops are soil depleters. A cover crop system for
organic sweet corn involves the establishment of an annual
legume, or cereal grain and legume mix. Pure stands of vetch
or combinations of cereal grain and hairy vetch are suitable.
3.12.3. Soil Nutrition and Irrigation
Organic Fertilization
Sweet corn is a fairly heavy feeder, and proper soil fertility
is critical for high yields and good growth. Once stunted by
lack of nutrients, sweet corn may never fully recover. Over
the growing season, sweet corn needs approximately 140 kg
of nitrogen per ha. After a successful cover crop with
legumes the organic growers, apply 30 tons of manure per
ha 2-3 weeks before planting. Nitrogen deficiency is fairly
common in sweet corn, particularly wet soils; flooded soils;
or dry, sandy soils. Nitrogen deficiency in young plants
causes the whole plant to be pale comprised of spindly
stalks and yellow leaf tips. In older plants, nitrogen stress is
often expressed kernel tip shriveling. 
Phosphorus-deficient plants are usually dark green with
reddish-purple leaf tips and margins. At low pH levels or in
sandy soils, magnesium deficiency may occur. Magnesium
deficiency in corn appears as yellow to white striping
between veins of leaves. Older leaves become reddish-pur-
ple and leaf tips may die.
Commonly used commercial organic fertilizers for
sweet corn are bone meal (4% nitrogen and 21% phosphor)
or cottonseed meal (7% nitrogen, 2.5% phosphor, and 1.5%
potassium). Adding organic matter such as animal manure
and compost to the soil increases the level of nutrients,
improves soil microbial activity, and increases water-holding
and nutrient-holding capacity. Sweet corn does best with a
pH of 6.0 to 6.5 and needs moderate to high levels of phos-
phorus and potassium. Rates of application should be
determined by soil testing. Rock phosphate, potassium
sulfate (mined, untreated source), sulfate of potash-magnesia,
and a limited number of other rock powders may also be
used for organic production. 
Rock mineral fertilizers, manures, and bulk composts
can be applied and incorporated during field preparation
and bedding operations; often, application is made in the Fall
previous to the preceding cover crop. Banding to the side of
the row at planting is another option-primarily in combination
with organic fertilizers or palletized and fortified composts. 
Irrigation
Sweet corn needs a continuous supply of moisture to ensure
pollination and growth of kernels in the ear. After the tas-
sels are produced, sweet corn requires 1 to 2.5 l of water
each week. A grower should never allow the soil to dry. 
3.12.4. Pest and Disease Management
Disease
Although there are several corn diseases, there now are many
sweet-corn cultivars with resistance to the major diseases.
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
211
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Whenever possible, organic growers select marketable cultivars
with disease resistance to fit specific needs and conditions.
Corn smut, which appears particularly on white cultivars,
is characterized by large, fleshy, gray-black galls on the
stalks, tassels, or ears. It is important to remove and destroy the
first galls before they open. To control smut, avoid injuring
plantings and avoid areas where smut occurred before. 
Rust and leaf blights can be a problem in extended
periods of warm, moist weather or areas of heavy dew. Rust
blown from field corn planted upwind nearby can threaten
sweet-corn crops. Cultivars resistant to rust are recommended
in threatening conditions. 
Mosaic is a viral disease. It is best controlled by resistant
varieties. If susceptible varieties are planted, it’s important
to remove Johnson grass, an alternate host, from adjacent
areas, and keep aphids-the vectoring agent-in check. 
Pests
Insects that attack sweet corn during its early growth include corn
rootworm, cutworm, white grub, wireworm, and flea beetle.
Wireworms and white grubs can be regulated by delaying
planting and to let exposed worms and grubs starve or be
eaten by birds. 
Corn earworms: The night-flying, light brown- or buff-
colored moth lays eggs on the corn silks. Low infestations can
be handled by simply removing the damaged ear tip from the
corn after harvest. Earworm adult moths should be monitored
by pheromone traps placed near the corn field. 
European corn borer larvae live over the winter in stalks and
ears left in the field. European corn borers usually have two
generations per year. Corn is vulnerable to corn borers when
tassels, silk, and pollen are present; preventative action is
required or damage will occur. Field corn planted nearby is the
source of most European corn borer problems for sweet corn. In
most cases, a grower should plow under corn debris to help
destroy over wintering stages of some pests. Trichogramma wasps
provide control against European corn borers, beneficial nema-
todes sprayed on the corn plant and silk may reduce earworm
damage, and ladybugs will help control aphid populations. 
3.12.5. Weed Management
Weed control in organic sweet corn production is based on good
rotation and timely mechanical cultivation. Before planting, weed
populations can be reduced through use of crop rotations and
cover crops. Try to rotate crops with different growth habits, warm
season crops, and crops grown in wide and narrow rows. On small
plantings, organic mulches, such as straw, can help shade out
weeds between the rows. Prior to planting, till the soil several
times to expose weed seeds and stimulate their germination.
Conduct the last tillage just before sowing the crop. After the crop
has emerged, cultivate frequently, getting as close to the corn
plants as possible without damaging the roots. Spring-tooth
harrows and finger weeders work especially well for this purpose.
When the corn is 25 to 30 cm tall, till for the last time, throwing
soil against the base of the plant (ridging). Equipment commonly
used to cultivate between rows includes multi-row rototillers, coil-
tine harrows and rolling cultivators. For small-scale production,
a grower may walk the field frequently with a hand-held hoe. 
3.12.6. Harvesting and Post Harvest
Handling
Each sweet-corn plant should produce at least one large ear
that should be harvested at prime maturity. Sweet corn should
be harvested when the silks are dry and brown and the ear has
enlarged to the point that the husks are tight. Under warm day and
night conditions, this stage is usually 17 to 18 days after silking.
Corn should be cooled at least 4 °C. The longer the
delay between harvest and cooling, the greater the conver-
sion of sugar to starch and subsequent quality loss. 
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
212
3.13. Water Melon
Watermelon, Citrullus lanatis, originated in South and East
Africa. 
Large (20-to-40-pound), red-fleshed, seeded watermelons
make up the bulk of those sold commercially, but smaller
(10 pound) icebox types are also grown on significant
acreages. Yellow-fleshed and seedless types are also grown,
but for the cultivars available now, seed is much more
expensive. Production may be more difficult and yield lower
than for standard cultivars. 
3.13.1. Ecological Requirements
Watermelons are also warm-season crops, requiring a
4-month frost-free period, minimal soil temperatures of
21°C for germination and soil temperatures of 24 to 27°C
for optimal germination. 
Watermelons are not as likely as muskmelons to produce
bland-tasting (low sugar) fruit when over-irrigated. They
can tolerate higher water levels and will, in fact, develop
blossom end rot, a calcium deficiency present when either
moisture or Ca is lacking. There are reports, however, that
excess nitrogen can reduce sugar content. 
Soil
Watermelons grow best on a sandy loam soil, with a pH
between 5.5 and 6.8. If planted on clay soils, yields may be
very low. In all cases, watermelons need soils with a high
level of organic matter.
Watermelon is known to be sensitive to manganese
toxicity, a common problem in low pH soils. Seedling
watermelons react to manganese toxicity with stunted
growth and yellowish crinkled leaves. Older plants generally
exhibit brown spots on older leaves that may be mistaken
for symptoms of gummy stem blight. Manganese toxicity is
usually associated with soils having a pH below 5.5. 
However, in wet seasons the condition may occur at
higher pH levels when the soil has been saturated for a period
of several days. This condition has been noted in several
watermelon fields with pH ranges at 5.8 or slightly higher
when the crop was planted flat. Planting watermelons
and other cucurbits on a bed is a good insurance against
manganese toxicity during a wet season. The best solution
to manganese toxicity is to apply lime in the fall at rates
based on the results of a soil test. A pH of 6.0 should be
maintained for maximum yields.
Temperature
The minimum soil temperature required for germination
of these crops is 16 °C, with the optimum range between
21 to 32°C.
Wind Breaks
In windy areas it is recommendable to plant wind breaks
between watermelon plants rows (e.g. grains) in order
to protect the young plants against any damage
(allow enough space to avoid windbreak contact with
watermelons). 
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
213
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Melon fields.
3.13.2. Organic Melon Production
Systems
Suitable Varieties
Best market varieties fulfill characteristics such as strong
rind for better transportation, small mesocarp (the white
part between the rind and the fruit flesh) and sweet
and juicy flesh. Seedless varieties also exist, but cause
higher  seed costs (and needs to be explained to the 
consumer as fruits are not 100% free of seeds). In
general, the selection of the right variety depends on
different factors such as site conditions, local availability,
market demands and resistances (in case of water
melons some varieties are resistant against Fusarium,
Anthracnose etc.).
Propagation and Nursery Management
Direct sowing is possible but not recommendable when
dealing with seedless varieties or less than ideal site conditions.
The latter would increase the germination time and delayed
development in the plant.
Watermelon vines require considerable space. Plant seed
3 cm deep in hills spaced 2 m apart. Allow 2-3 m between
rows. After the seedlings are established, thin to the best
three plants per hill. Plant single transplants 60-90 cm apart
in the rows.
To replace failures, it is best to prepare seedlings inside.
Start the seeds 3 weeks before they are to be set out in the
field. Plant 2 or 3 seeds in pellets, pots or cell packs and
thin to the best one or two plants. 
For expensive seedless types, plant one seed to a pot or
cell and discard those that do not germinate. Do not start
too early - large watermelon seedlings transplant poorly.
If you grow seedless melons, you must plant a standard
seeded variety alongside. The seedless melon varieties do
not have the fertile pollen necessary to pollinate and set
the fruit.
Design of the Rotation
Due to the considerable impact of insects and diseases,
watermelons should not be replanted in the same place for
a period of as long as 4 years
Cultivation of other curcubits like cucumbers, melons,
squash in the neighborhood of watermelons does not cause
problems with product quality. Only when producing seeds
for further propagation, is isolation needed to maintain
crop purity.
3.13.3. Irrigation
Watermelons are deep rooted in sandy soils when growth is
vigorous. They require uniform irrigation for optimum
growth and yield. Reduce irrigations as fruit reach harvest
stage.
Research has shown that the use of drip irrigation is
superior to sprinkler irrigation. Drip irrigation under plas-
tic mulch is an effective way of applying water efficiently
and may reduce total water requirements by as much as
30%.
Soil type does not affect the amount of total water need-
ed, but does dictate frequency of water application. Lighter
soils need more frequent water applications, but less water
applied per application. Watermelon is often grown with
furrow irrigation.
3.13.4 Pest and Disease Management
Water melons are susceptible to physiological disturbances,
diseases and pests. Preventive measures against such pests
and diseases have priority in organic melon production: 
< Optimal site selection
< Selection of pest and disease resistant varieties
< Wide rotation (in case of soil borne diseases)
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
214
< Creation of semi-natural habitats and ecological com-
pensation areas
< Improve soil fertility and activate soil microbial life
< Balanced nutrient supply
With these preventive measures most pest and disease
problems can be avoided or reduced. In addition, organic
preparations can be applied (see positive lists); however, they
often are less effective than synthetic products. Therefore,
only a combination of preventive and curative methods leads
to successful organic melon production. Attention must be
given to the legal requirements for organic agriculture (e.g.
EU-regulation only allows for a restrictive use of means like
copper, natural insecticides etc.). In the case that new prepa-
rations should be applied, final approval granted by the
responsible certification body is necessary.
Disease
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
215
O r g a n i c  C u l t i v a t i o n  o f  F r u i t s  a n d  V e g e t a b l e s
Table 75: 
Examples of Melon Diseases and Ways to Manage them Organically
Disease Symptoms Preventive measures Direct measures
Antracnose (Colletotrichum lagenarium) Circular spots that spread Crop rotation, cupper applications, Once infected, there are no effective measures 
every 10 days
Pest Insects
Table 76: 
Examples of Melon Pests and Ways to Manage them Organically
Pest Damage Control
Aphids: Bean aphid Aphis fabae Melon aphid Aphis Suck leaves Encourage natural predators like ladybirds, spiders and lacewings; Intercropping 
gossypii Potato aphid Macrosiphum euphorbiae of onions; Botanicals like Neem, Garlic/Chilli extracts, Derris etc. 
Cucumber beetles, including Striped cucumber beetle Use of White Tephrosia (Tephrosia candida) in form of mulch and/or aqueous  
Acalymma vittatum Small, slender, greenish-yellow beetles extract (20g of leaves in 100 ml of water); Tephrosia plants contains strong fish 
with three prominent stripes on back Western spotted poisons which may also affect human health. 
cucumber beetle Diabrotica and ecimpunctata
Cutworms and Armyworms Several species Red, brown, Feed on roots, stems, leaves, buds. Usually in soil Cultural Methods: Plowing one month before planting to turn caterpillars/larvae 
green worms by day to the surface; hand-picking at night for removal of larvae; Natural insecticides: 
Derris, Rotenon 
Grasshoppers Different species Feed on foliage, buds, and blooms White Tephrosia (see above)
Loopers, including Cabbage looper Trichoplusia ni Bacillus thuringiensis
Spider mites Tetranychus spp. Feed on plant juices. Support of predators e.g. ladybird beetle; Insect- controlling plants like Neem, 
Pyrethrum and Turmeric; Low nitrogen level in the soil;
Wireworms Limonius spp. Intercropping of garlic
3.13.5. Weed Management
As for all crops; good crop rotation is the pre-condition to
avoiding greater damage due to weeds. In the commercial
production of water melons, the use of ground plastic
mulches is widespread. However, in organic farming
systems, bio-degradable mulches are preferable if available.
3.13.6. Harvesting and Post Harvest
Handling
Harvests generally begin about 30 days after full bloom and
continue for several weeks with 3 to 4 cuttings at 3-to-5-day
intervals. Ripeness in watermelon is difficult to determine
because the fruit remains attached to the vine, rather than
“slipping” off. The flesh of a typical red-fleshed watermelon
changes from immature pink to red-ripe, and then to over-
ripe within a 10-to-14 day harvest window. Overripe fruits
have a watery, mushy texture and lower sugars. Rind color
changes indicating maturity, if any, are specific to cultivars.
“Golden Midget” turns yellow as it ripens, and “Sugar
Baby” becomes dark green and loses its stripes. Generally,
however, the only indication of ripeness is that the tendrils
of the leaf closest to the fruit attachment become dry.
Additional ripeness indicators include a change in ground
spot color from greenish-white to pale yellow. The rind
becomes hard to pierce with the fingernail and the blossom
end “fills out”. When ripe, there is also a “bloom” or powdery
coating giving the fruit a duller appearance and a rough
feel. Although researchers are experimenting with various
nondestructive gauges of fruit soluble sugars, at this point
the usual method for timing the start of watermelon harvest
is to cut open a few representative melons in the field. 
In addition to the difficulties of harvest timing, there are
a number of other problems associated with watermelon
harvest. If the field has received abundant water, the water-
melons may crack open, especially if harvested in the
morning when full of water (turgid). The risk of cracking
can be reduced by harvesting in the afternoon and by cutting
the stem rather than pulling the fruit off. Stacking water-
melons on the side, rather than on end, also reduces the risk
of cracking. 
Cut watermelons must be shaded to minimize additional
heat buildup and because direct sunlight after harvest (espe-
cially on the ground-spot) reduces watermelon quality. If
plants are not too turgid, field heat can also be minimized
by harvesting in the morning. Watermelons should be dry
when loaded, however, rather than dew-covered. They are
either bulk loaded into straw-padded trucks, or placed in
multi-walled corrugated fiberboard bins holding 60 to 80
melons and weighing 1,100 to 1,200 pounds fully loaded.
Transit temperatures should be 7 to 10°C. 
Watermelons are stored at higher temperatures and
lower humidity than muskmelons (10° to 13°C, 90 percent
relative humidity). Storage for prolonged periods below
10°C can lead to chilling injury; e.g., one week at 0°C can
cause pitting, color loss and off flavors. At 10° to 13°C,
they can be kept 2 to 3 weeks after harvest. Even within this
range, however, the red color is gradually lost. Although
watermelons do not ripen off the vine, flavor and color in
seeded (but not seedless) watermelons will improve over
a 7 day holding period at room temperature. 
O r g a n i c  V e g e t a b l e s
216
Table 77: 
Direct Measures for Weed-regulation in Organic
Melon Production
Measure Advantages Disadvantages
Bio-degradable ground Keeps the soil warm Expensive  
mulches (increase earliness), protects 
against weed and certain 
pests
P A R T
Global Market Perspectives for
Developing Countries
C
The major organic markets are expected to grow between
10 to 30% in the next 5 to 10 years. In all mayor organic
markets, the product group fruit  and  vegetables plays an
important role. Accordingly, organically grown fruits (fresh
and processed including nuts) and vegetables (mainly
processed vegetables) from subtropical and tropical areas
are facing good marketing perspectives. At the export level,
organic price premiums of about 10 to 50% are reported (of
course, depending on different factors like product, quality
and season). But organic premiums are expected to
decrease in the coming years. 
Exportation under own brands is extremely difficult
because of the fact that processors, wholesalers and
retailers have introduced own brands to the market.
Therefore, companies interested in being listed by whole-
salers/retailers have to elaborate market specific concepts
utilizing a sufficient marketing budget. In fact, most of the
products from developing countries are either raw materials
or semi-processed products. 
Normally, importers are interested in the development
of strategic and/or long-term partnerships with suppliers.
This is also true for the organic fruit and vegetable market.
Nevertheless, the highly competitive market requires a
reasonable price/quality ratio, continuity of supply and
additional services. In many cases, producers/exporters in
developing countries start conversion to organic agriculture
after concluding a co-operation contract with a buyer. 
European importers of organic fruit and vegetables see
mayor constraints in the trade with developing countries
regarding product quality, lack of reliability of exporters,
communication problems, logistic problems and organic
certification issues. The latter is of increasing importance.
Even in the European Union, with the EEC-regulation for
organic agriculture, (EEC 2092/91) the implementation of
the regulation differs from country to country. Furthermore,
private organic labeling organizations dominating the
organic market in some European countries have specific
requirements. The recent introduction of national organic
regulations in Japan and the United States made the inter-
national trade with organic food products a bit more
complicated. Sometimes, organic regulations are seen as a
trade barrier. In this context, the International Federation of
Organic Agriculture Movements (IFOAM) is promoting an
international harmonization process in order to overcome
the mentioned constraints.
Exporters in developing countries are required to carefully
investigate the particularities in their target markets:
Standard Requirements
Since 2001, the use of ethylene in organic pineapple
production (flowering induction) is banned by the EU-
regulation for organic agriculture. As a consequence most
of the larger organic pineapple suppliers (in Ghana,
Cameroon and Ivory Coast) have lost their businesses.
Organic production systems relying on the use of copper
preparations will also be banned in the future.
Prices, Market Trends and Consumer Patterns
In order to adjust production and export strategies, it is of
utmost importance to investigate the market situation in the
target countries on a regular basis. Every single market has its
own characteristics, such as preferences for specific products,
new product trends or changing consumer behavior.
Domestic Production and Supply Structure
Because of the strong preference for domestically produced
organic food the availability of the various fruit and
vegetable products and/or periods of short supply have to
be analyzed carefully. For example, imported products like
apples, pears, onion and garlic are accepted only in the
off-season period.
Non-harmonized international regulations for organic
food, the lack of market transparency, and insufficient
up-to-date information on prices must be seen as a major
problems for exporters in developing countries. Only
218
in very exceptional cases neutral information on pricing
is given. For example, the German semi-governmental
organization ZMP (www.zmp.de) offers a weekly price
information service for organic fresh produce as well as
background market reports. 
The ability to offer high-quality fresh produce depends,
to a large extent, on the professional post-harvest treatments
of the products. In this context, adequate infrastructure and
logistic systems (including cold storage and disinfestations
facilities approved for organic food) are the pre-conditions
for market success. 
Inappropriate packaging and labeling of organic
fruit and vegetables is also frequent between exporters and
importers. Concerning packaging materials, more and more
biodegradable materials are being used. 
With a few exceptions, world-wide consumers prefer
domestically produced organic fruits and vegetables for
different reasons (support of domestic farmers, reliability
of certification, food miles discussion etc.). Organic
imports from countries with a “green image” (like New
Zealand in Japan) are far more accepted by the consumers.
Keeping this in mind, the market success of single
exporters can be supported by export promotion activities
aiming at improving/developing a green image for a export
country in a target market.
219
G l o b a l  M a r k e t  P e r s p e c t i v e s  f o r  D e v e l o p i n g  C o u n t r i e s
The graphic below shows that the major markets for organic
products are in North America and in Europe. However,
emerging organic markets also exist in different Asian and
Latin American countries. In this chapter, the organic
markets of a selected group of countries is presented;
here, is special interest is paid to the fruit and vegetable sector. 
(Source: Organic Monitor) 
All figures mentioned in the subsequent chapters are
found in the literature and should be used carefully.
Nevertheless, the figures presented give a rough idea of
organic market reality and future developments within.
4.1. North-America
The North American region is not only one of the largest
production areas of organic food, but is also the largest
organic market. The leading position is held by the United
States followed by Canada. Despite the fact that Mexico is
exporting increasing quantities of different organic prod-
ucts like coffee, sesame, honey, citrus, apples, avocados and
bananas, no domestic organic market has yet been devel-
oped. 
4.1.1. United States
Organic Market in Figures and Distribution Channels
With an estimated value of 9.3 billion US-$ at retail price
level, the United States is the largest single market for
organic food products (2001). The market has shown
growth rates of 24% in the last 3 years. The organic share
of total food sales is estimated with 2%. 
Nearly all mainstream retailers have introduced a
range of organic food products within the last years.
However, with more than 12.000 natural food stores, a
good part of all organic sales are realized in the specialty
retail sector. Currently, two natural food store chains,
WILD OATS and WHOLE FOODS MARKET, are operating
throughout the United States. Most of the natural food
stores are concentrated in 10 states. 
Organic Markets by Regions
4 
O r g a n i c  M a r k e t s  b y  R e g i o n s
220
ASIA 16%
USA 37%
EUROPE 46%
OCEANIA 1%
Figure 3: 
Breakdown of Global Sales Revenues by Region
in 2001 (estimated)
Table 78: 
Distribution Channels for Organic Food and
Beverages in the United States
Distribution Channel Percentage
Conventional Supermarkets 43%
Specialty Stores 50%
Others 7%
The Organic Fruit and Vegetable Market
The United States has the ability to produce a wide range of
organic fruit and vegetables in the different climatic regions
of the country. According to US official statistics from 1997,
about 41.000 ha of fruits (incl. nuts) and vegetables were
cultivated organically. Principal domestically produced
organic vegetables are mixed vegetables, lettuce, potatoes,
tomatoes and carrots. Principal domestically produced
fruits are grapes, apples, citrus, dates and tree nuts.
A substantial part of all organic sales is realized by the
product segment of fruit and vegetables. Figures of 1999
show that a turnover of 1.45 billion US-$ were realized in
both natural food stores and conventional supermarkets.
The organic premium seems to be a bit higher in natural
food shops. All in all premiums are ranging between 11%
and 167 %.
O r g a n i c  M a r k e t s  b y  R e g i o n s
221
G l o b a l  M a r k e t  P e r s p e c t i v e s  f o r  D e v e l o p i n g  C o u n t r i e s
Table 79: 
US Fruit and Vegetable Imports – Theoretical Organic Potential (1999/2000)
Product Quantity (US$ 1000) Product Quantity (US$ 1000)
VEGETABLES FRUIT
Tomatoes 12.806 Nuts and preps 15.428
Peppers 9.114 Grapes, fresh 11.041
Potatoes, fresh or frozen 8.717 Cashew nuts 9.135
Other vegs, fresh or frozen 6.115 Melons 5.220
Cucumbers 3.544 Citrus, fresh 4.483
Cauliflower and broccoli , fresh or frozen 3.234 Mangoes 2.899
Onions 2.749 Pineapples, fresh or frozen 2.680
Asparagus, fresh or frozen 2.400 Berries, excl strawberries 2.665
Squash 2.248 Other fruit, fresh or frozen 2.433
Beans, fresh or frozen 860 Avocados 2.158
Peas incl. chickpeas 746 Apples, fresh 1.846
Garlic 549 Strawberries, fresh or frozen 1.678
Eggplant 482 Pears 1.613
Carrots, fresh or frozen 463 Pecans 1.574
Lettuce 405 Other nuts 1.455
Water chestnuts 404 Peaches 794
Filberts 378 Kiwi, fresh 723
Mustard 324 Macademia nuts 727
Radishes, fresh 298 Brazil nuts 550
Okra, fresh or frozen 245 Plums 471
Cabbage 210 Chestnuts 199
Celery, fresh 209 Pistachio nuts 41
Endive, fresh 83
TOTAL vegetables 56.583 TOTAL fruits 69.813
No figures are available with respect to the import
value. The total value of fruit and vegetable is estimated at
6 billion US-$ a year. 2% of all fresh produce sales are said
to be organic. This would equal about 120 Mio US-$.
However, this is only a rough calculation as the food service
sector is not included. 
Exporters have to analyze the organic market by states,
as considerable regional differences with respect to the
retail, the import and distribution sectors exist. Some of the
important market players at the import and distribution levels
are ALBERT’s ORGANICS (importer and wholesale dis-
tributor), BETA PURE FOODS (ingredient supplier),
MADE IN NATURE FRESH (importer and distributor)
JONATHAN’S ORGANICS (importer and distributor) and
VALLEY CENTER PACKING (importer of organic citrus,
avocados and exotic fruits).
4.1.2. Canada
Organic Market in Figures and Distribution Channels
The organic retail market volume is estimated at approx-
imately 1 billion US-$ in 2000, which comprises 1% of
the total food sales. The organic market is expected to
reach 3.1 billion US-$ in 2005 with annual market
growth rates of 20%. 
All mainstream retailers like SOBEYS, A&P, SAFE-
WAY and LOBLAWS are in the process of extending the
organic offer. The largest supermarket chain LOBLAWS
has recently introduced an own organic brand
(“Presidents Choice Organics”). Health stores were the
first retailers offering organic food in Canada. These spe-
cialty stores still play an important role. In particular, big-
ger stores like ALTERNATIVES, THE BIG CARROT and
TAU reach annual sales volumes of more than 1 million
US-$ each. In Canada, the organic food manufacturing
industry is very small. As a consequence, more than 80%
of all packed and final food products are imported from
the United States.
The Organic Fruit and Vegetable Market
In 2000 about 365 fruit growers and 415 vegetable
growers cultivated about 3400 ha organically. The most
important domestically produced organic fruits and
vegetables are carrots, broccoli, lettuce, shallots,
squash and/or apples, pears, peaches, raspberries and
strawberries. Some of the most popular items are
reported to be bagged organic salads and greens, cherry
tomatoes, apples, bananas, oranges, broccoli and
romain lettuce. Because of the climatic situation, special
interest is also given to exotic fruits. Most of the fresh
produce is from Canada and the United States; a smaller
part is imported from Mexico and some South-
American countries. According to company statements,
PROORGANICS is the leading organic fresh food
importer/distributor in Canada.
O r g a n i c  M a r k e t s  b y  R e g i o n s
222
Table 80: 
Distribution Channels for Organic Food and
Beverages in Canada
Distribution Channel Percentage
Conventional Supermarkets 49%
Specialty Stores 48%
Others (e.g. Online-Groceries, Direct Sales) 3%
4.2. Europe
Organic agriculture has a long tradition in Europe. The
European market for organic food represents the second
largest market after the USA. Organic retail sales increased
to 9 billion US-$ in 2000. In the last two years, the organic
market has shown significant growth in most of the
European Union member states with annual growth rates
ranging between 20-30 %.
The most important driving factor of market growth is
an increased health awareness of consumers. In combina-
tion with the outbreak of severe food scares such as Mad
Cow Disease and Foot and Mouth Disease, safe and healthy
food is a top issue in all European countries. Other impor-
tant reasons to buy organic food are: better taste, non-
genetically modified food, environmentally friendly pro-
duction and well-being of animals. 
In all European countries, the leading supermarket
chains have entered the organic business in the last years.
In a very short time span core lines of organic food prod-
ucts were developed that have led to growth rates in some
product categories of more than 50%. Distribution chan-
nels other than supermarkets include specialty retail stores
(Whole Food Stores, Health Stores etc.), direct sales of
farmers (farm shops, farmers markets), home delivery
services and Internet online-shops. Currently, so-called
“organic supermarkets” with sales areas greater than 200sqm
are shooting up like mushrooms in the bigger cities of
some European countries. Another trend towards organic
food can be seen in the catering industry serving either in
canteens of social, health and municipal institutions or in
the restaurant sector.
With the growing market large multinational food
manufacturers have entered the organic market step by
step (Heinz UK, Nestle, Kraft Group etc.). Furthermore,
TV advertisements for organic food took place in different
European countries for the first time (Italy, Germany,
United Kingdom). All estimates with respect to the
further market growth came to the conclusion that the
current driving factors will push the market further on,
but growth rates will be not as high as in past. In single
countries with a high per capita consumption of organic
food, first indications are present that the market is
becoming saturated.
In retail strategies either at supermarkets or organic
specialty stores, an attractive and diverse offer in fresh
organic fruits  and  vegetables plays an essential role.
Mainly the specialty retail sector (including the organic
supermarkets) tries to offer a larger and much fresher
assortment of organic fruit and vegetables in order to
compete with the mainstream retailers. In this context,
specialty retailers give regional fruit and vegetables a
prominent place. In many cases, farmer groups deliver
directly to the outlets with the effect of a high degree of
freshness that the logistic system of mainstream retailers
cannot achieve.
As food consumption patterns are changing towards
more convenient foods products like pre-packed salads,
frozen vegetables etc. are increasing, but not only convenient
food is required. More and more consumers prefer to buy
ready to serve meals and/or eat outside home. In general
fruit and vegetable consumption is increasing in European
countries (a tendency that is backed up by a growing number
of vegetarians and campaigns like “5 a day”).
With respect to organic food manufacturing, the organic
baby food sector took a lead in the last years. In the UK the
organic share of total baby food sales have reached 30%, in
Germany with the early engagement of HIPP the organic
share is above 60% of total baby food sales. Baby food
manufacturers like HIPP, HEINZ (UK), NESTLE are in
need of substantial quantities of tropical fruit pulps
(banana, mango, papaya). The market for dried fruits (and
nuts) is also growing as both product segments are needed
for specific compound food products (müesli, bakeries,
O r g a n i c  M a r k e t s  b y  R e g i o n s
223
G l o b a l  M a r k e t  P e r s p e c t i v e s  f o r  D e v e l o p i n g  C o u n t r i e s
snack food etc.). Another important organic food pro-
cessing sector with an increasing demand is the fruit and
vegetable juice sector. In addition, citrus fruits, banana,
guava, mango, pineapple and papaya juice concentrates are
required.
(Source: Organic Monitor 2000)
4.2.1. Austria
Organic Market in Figures and Distribution Channels
The organic retail market volume is estimated with about
320 Mio EURO in 2000 (+ 11% in comparison to 1999)
which is 1.8%-2.0% of the total food market. Per capita
consumption of organic food reaches a value of 40 EURO
per year. 
Supermarket chains with a high profile in the area of
organic food marketing are Billa-Merkur (belonging to
REWE Group) and SPAR Group. Billa has realized an
organic share of the total turnover of about 4.2% (180 Mio
EURO) in 2000 and SPAR Group of about 1.17% (42 Mio
EURO). It is expected that supermarket chains will increase
their share of the total organic food market up to 78%-80%
until 2005. The specialty retail sector plays a minor role but
may increase in the future. At the moment, only 160 so-
called natural food shops exist, most of them with sales
areas less than 100 sqm. Great potential is seen in the gas-
tronomy and catering sector.
The most known organic labels in the year 2000
were the own brands of SPAR (Natur Pur known by 86%
of the Austrian consumers) and Billa (ja!Natürlich
known by 84%) as well as the label of the biggest Austrian
certification body Ernte für das Leben (known by 35%;
www.ernte.at).
The Organic Fruit and Vegetable Market
The premium for organic fruit and vegetables range from
20% to30% at supermarket level. Traditionally, organic
food from regional production plays a specific role in
Austria. Main organic vegetables are potatoes, carrots,
onions and to a minor extent zucchini, tomatoes, lettuce,
cucumber and green pepper. 
The main supermarket chains are still committed to the
policy of preferring local production, which may change in
the future. In this context it is important to know that more
than 50% of all organic fruit and vegetables sold by
Austrian organic farmers directly. 23% by the supermarkets
and 19% by specialty stores. In most of the imports, either
fruits or vegetables originate from Italy, Spain, France and
Germany:
The organic industry shows less interest in perishable
products due to the higher economic risk. In addition,
Austrian consumers do not demonstrate trust in organic
O r g a n i c  M a r k e t s  b y  R e g i o n s
224
SUPERMARKETS 
45%
NATURAL FOOD SECTOR 21%
DIRECT 
SALES 
16%
INDUSTRIAL SECTOR 
18%
Figure 4: 
European Market for Imported Organic Fruit 
and Vegetables: Sales Breakdown 
by Marketing Channels, 2000
Table 81: 
Distribution channels for organic food and 
beverages in Austria
Distribution Channel Percentage
Conventional Supermarkets 75%
Specialty Stores 10%
Direct Sales 10%
Others 05%
products from outside of the European Union. This two fac-
tors result in a small and slowly growing market for tropi-
cal fruits and vegetables. Imported bananas, pears, mangos
and avocado failed to exceed a value of 1 Mio EURO in 2000. 
The majority of imported organic fruits and vegetables
is handled directly by the supermarket chains and/or
specialized importers. A portion of the import products is
supplied by South German companies. 
4.2.2. France
Organic Market in Figures and Distribution Channels
The organic retail market volume is estimated with about
1.150 Mio EURO in 2000, which is 1.0% of the total food
market. Per capita consumption of organic food reaches a
value of 19.6 EURO per year. 
Nearly all supermarket chains like Carrefour, Casino
Group, Monoprix etc. are engaged in marketing of organic
food. The first supermarket offering organic food was
Monoprix. Carrefour introduced an own organic brand
(Carrefour Bio) in 1997. It is expected that supermarket
chains will increase their share of the total organic food
market in future. 
However, the French specialty retail sector also has a
strong market position, with more than 3.500 outlets.
Unlike other European countries, the specialty retail sector
is far more organized. The leading position is held by
Biocoop with more than 200 specialized shops. But franchise
systems like La Vie Claire (100 outlets) or Rayons Verts
(>40 outlets) are also playing an important role. The most
known organic label in France is by far the national logo
Agriculture Biologique (AB; www.agriculture.gouv.fr).
The overall organic market growth is estimated by 20%
to 30% over the next years due to an ongoing extension of
outlets and assortments.
The Organic Fruit and Vegetable Market
The French organic fruit and vegetable market has shown a
high growth rate of more than 30% (2000/2001). Due to the
slow increase of the domestic production, lucrative market
opportunities exist for exporters. Almost one third of
organic fruit and vegetable products were imported in the
year 2000. The most important domestically produced 
vegetables in the year 1999 were potatoes (789 ha), cabbage
(685 ha), pumpkin (276 ha), artichokes (170 ha), lettuce
(160 ha) and green beans (105 ha). Regarding fruit and tree
nuts, the picture is as follows: plums (567 ha), apples
(591 ha), walnuts (712 ha), chestnuts (1119 ha), apricots
(405 ha), kiwifruit (223 ha), almonds (218 ha), pears
(180 ha), peaches (157 ha) and cherries (225 ha). 
The mayor distribution channels for organic fruits  and
vegetables in 1999 were Direct sales (48%), mainstream
retailers (20%) and specialty stores (32%). One of the most
O r g a n i c  M a r k e t s  b y  R e g i o n s
225
G l o b a l  M a r k e t  P e r s p e c t i v e s  f o r  D e v e l o p i n g  C o u n t r i e s
Table 82: 
The Main Imported Organic Vegetables 
and Fruit
Vegetables Quantity Fruits Quantity
(in tons) (in tons)
Zucchini 2.700 Oranges 4.000
Kohlrabi 2.500 Lemon 3.400
Broccoli 1.000 Kiwi 1.000
Potatoes 900 Apple 400
Onions 700
Carrots 1.200
Fennel 300
Tomatoes 100
TOTAL 9.400 TOTAL 8.800
Table 83: 
Distribution Channels for Organic Food and
Beverages in France
Distribution Channel Percentage
Conventional Supermarkets 47%
Specialty Stores 43%
Direct Sales 10%
important companies in the French organic fruit and
vegetable market is BIOPRIM, based at the wholesale and
distribution center in Perpignan. A part from France and
import products from Spain, Italian products play an
important role. However, Morocco, Egypt and countries in
Latin-American have reached growing importance as
suppliers. BIOPRIM also bought farms in Morocco.
BIOPRIM PRONATURA and BIODYNAMIS are impor-
tant market players, and are also engaged in re-exports to
North-European countries. 
From all tropical fruit imports, pineapple, banana, mango,
avocado, passion fruit, papaya and lychee count for about
15% of the market. 
4.2.3. Germany
Organic Market in Figures and Distribution Channels
The organic retail market volume is estimated with about
2.06 billion EURO in 2000, (+ 14% in comparison to 1999)
which is 1.6% of the total food market. Per capita consumption
of organic food reaches a value of 31 EURO per year. 
Supermarket chains with a high profile in marketing of
organic food are REWE, EDEKA and tegut. Own organic
brands of German supermarket chains (REWE with
Füllhorn; EDEKA with Bio-Wertkost, TENGELMANN
with Naturkind etc.) count for less than 50% of the total
organic sales of the multipliers. Most of the larger supermarket
chains still fail to present an attractive range of organic fruit
and vegetables in their outlets, whereas some regional super-
market chains like TEGUT and BREMKE&HÖRSTER have
developed attractive organic ranges of fruit and vegetables. 
It is expected that supermarket chains will increase their
share of the total organic food market in the future, but the
German specialty retail sector has a strong market position.
About 4.000 natural food shops and health shops offer organic
products, most of them with at least a small range of fruit and
O r g a n i c  M a r k e t s  b y  R e g i o n s
226
Table 84: 
Imports of Organic Fruits and Vegetables 
into France – 1999
Vegetables Quantity Fruits Quantity
(in tons) (in tons)
Artichoke 48 Apple 1.814
Broccoli 1.550 Apricot 155
Cabbage 81 Avocado 380
Carrot 1.710 Banana 914
Celery 32 Citrus 400
Cherry tomato 60 Orange 3.873
Courgette 675 Lemon 1.405
Cucumber 16 Tangerine 774
Endives 17 Pomelo 570
Fennel 131 Coconut 3
Fresh ginger 5 Date 18
Garlic 43 Grape 272
Green beans 11 Guava 2
Lettuce 60 Kiwi 145
Onion 467 Mango 156
Pepper 413 Melon 10
Potato 383 Nectarine 7
Pumpkins 113 Papaya 6
Sweet potato 22 Passion fruit 1
Tomato 2.707 Peach, Nectarine 431
Other vegetables 1.156 Pear 287
Pineapple 386
Strawberry 67
Watermelon 18
Other fruits 9
TOTAL 9.700 TOTAL 12.100
Table 85: 
Distribution Channels for Organic Food and
Beverages in Germany
Distribution Channel Percentage
Conventional Supermarkets 33%
Specialty Stores 38%
Direct Sales 17%
Bakeries, Butchers 07%
Others 05%
vegetables. In order to increase competitiveness, specialty
stores have extended the sales’areas over the years. More than
100 organic supermarkets with sales areas of more than
200sqm were founded in the last 3 years. Most of the newly
founded organic supermarkets intend to attract customers with
a wide range of fresh organic fruit and vegetables. Freshness
and diversity of products (including) are of utmost importance
in the competition process with the supermarket chains. 
The most recognizable organic labels in the year 2000 were
the labels of three important organic farmers and certification
organizations BIOLAND (known by 46%; www.bioland.de),
NATURLAND (known by 31%; www.naturland.de) and
DEMETER (known by 31%; www.demeter.de). At the end of
the year 2001, the German Government launched a nation-
al organic logo (www.bio-siegel.de) that will be promoted
through a strong publicity campaign. 
The Organic Fruit and Vegetable Market
According to a GfK consumer poll recently published, 30% of
German households bought once organic vegetables at least in
the last 9 months of 2001. Mainly, households with children
and those with housewives between 35 and 49 years buy fresh
organic vegetables. Organic vegetables are sold in the specialty
retails stores (19.2%), weekly farmers markets (15.7%), direct
sales (19.8%) and the different conventional retailers like
supermarkets, hypermarkets, discounters (31.7%). 
Almost half (45% ) of all organic fruits and vegetables sold
in Germany are imported. The major part of importations
originate from EU countries like Italy, Spain, France and
The Netherlands. In addition, exotic fruits as well as off-
season vegetables are imported from Non-EU countries.
Main supplying countries are Argentina (apples and pears),
Brazil (mangos), Dominican Republic (banana, mango,
coconuts), Egypt (potatoes, onions and garlic), Israel
(avocado, citrus-fruits, spring vegetables), New Zealand
(kiwi fruits and apples), South Africa (table grapes) and
Uganda (mango, banana and pineapples).
Some of the major market players are LEHMANN
NATUR (leading importer and distributor of organic fruit
and vegetables), NATURKOST WEBER (importer and
wholesaler of both fresh and frozen/processed produce),
BIOTROPIC (subsidiary of LEHMANN NATUR and
specialized in tropical fruits like banana, mango),
NATURKOST SCHRAMM (importer and wholesaler
focusing on the specialty retail sector), DENREE
(Germany’s largest wholesaler for organic food with a
complete range of fruits and vegetables) and SAVID
EUROPE (largest European importer of organic bananas
from Dominican Republic, co-operation partner of
DENREE). However, conventional fruit traders
(importers and wholesalers) such ATLANTA GROUP
(Germany’s biggest fruit trading company) have also
started to work in the organic market. In the organic
dried fruit (nut) sector companies like RAPUNZEL
NATURKOST AG, DAVERT MÜHLE, CARE
NATURKOST and DE VAU GE GESUNDKOSTWERK
are important importers and processors. In the fruit juices
sector VOELKEL AG and BEUTELSBACHER GmbH
are major importers. Last but not least, HIPP (babyfood
manufacturer) is one of the world’s largest organic food
manufacturer.
4.2.4. Italy
Organic Market in Figures and Distribution Channels
The organic retail market volume is estimated at about
1.45 billion EURO in 2001 (with growth rates of 20% in
the last 4 years), which is 1.5% of the total food market. 
O r g a n i c  M a r k e t s  b y  R e g i o n s
227
G l o b a l  M a r k e t  P e r s p e c t i v e s  f o r  D e v e l o p i n g  C o u n t r i e s
Table 86: 
Distribution Channels for Organic Food and
Beverages in Italy
Distribution Channel Percentage
Conventional Supermarkets 50%
Specialty Stores 40%
Others 10%
COOP, the first supermarket chain offering organic
food in 1996, and ESSELUNGA has the strongest profiles
with respect to sales of organic food. Both run own organic
brands, and have increased the number of outlets offering
organic food systematically. All in all, 1500 supermarket
outlets offer organic food all over Italy. The specialty retail
sector counts with about 1100 natural food shops that offer
fresh produce. Recently, the franchise companies NAT-
URASI and BOTTEGAENATURA have founded about 40
organic supermarkets with a huge range of organic fruit
and vegetable products.
The Organic Fruit and Vegetable Market
The share of organic fruit and vegetables from total organic
sales is estimated at almost 30%. The important distribution
channels for fruit and vegetables are supermarket chains
(45%), specialty retail shops (45%) and direct sales (15%). 
As the Italian government follows a bureaucratic procedure
for import authorizations from organic products from Third
Countries, most of the organic imports from Non-EU countries
are realized by trade partners in other EU countries. Only a small
number of Italian companies holds a direct import license in
the organic fruit and vegetable sector (e.g. ORGANICSUR).
Main Non-EU suppliers of organic fruits and vegetables are
located in Angola, Argentina (apples and pears), Cameroon
(pineapples), Colombia (bananas), Dominican Republic
(bananas), Egypt (carrots, garlic, potatoes) and Israel. 
Some of the important market players in the organic
fruit and vegetable segment are APOFRUIT, BRIO and
ECOR (all distributors of fresh organic produce focusing
on the supply of supermarket chains). Others are BAULE
VAULANTE (distributor and processor focusing on nuts
and dried fruits), KI GROUP (nuts, dried fruits and
processed goods) and ABAFOODS (concentrated juices).
4.2.5. Switzerland
Organic Market in Figures and Distribution Channels
The organic retail market volume is estimated with about
490 Mio EURO in 2000 (+ 20% in comparison to 1999) which
is 2,1% of the total food market. Per capita consumption of
organic food reaches a value of 68 EURO per year. 
O r g a n i c  M a r k e t s  b y  R e g i o n s
228
Table 87: 
Imports of the Most Relevant Organic Vegetables
and Fruit into Italy – 2000
Product Quantity (in tons)
VEGETABLES
Garlic 120
Carrots 1.840
Onions 1.360
Peppers 120
Potatoes 800
Other vegetables 40
TOTAL vegetables 4.280
FRUIT
Oranges 60
Apricots (incl. dried) 28
Plums (incl. dried) 20
Apples 495
Pears 1.350
Kiwis 950
Bananas 9.235
Almonds 72
Hazelnuts 66
Other dried fruit 148
Other fruit 60
TOTAL fruits 12.484
Table 88: 
Distribution Channels for Organic Food and
Beverages in Switzerland
Distribution Channel Percentage
Conventional Supermarkets 69%
Specialty Stores 19%
Direct Sales 7%
Others 5%
Supermarket chains with a high profile in marketing of
organic food are COOP, MIGROS and SPAR Group. In the
year 2000, the following organic shares of the total turnover
with food products were realized: COOP 5.3% (225 Mio
EURO), MIGROS 2.2% (112 Mio EURO) and SPAR
Group < 0.5% (0.8 Mio EURO).
The most known organic labels in the year 2000
were the own brands of COOP (“NaturaPlan” known by
81% of the Swiss consumers), MIGROS (“MigrosBio”
known by 70% and the label of the leading organic label-
ing organization Bio Suisse (“Knospe” known by 58%;
www.bio-suisse.ch).
The Organic Fruit and Vegetable Market
With a 5% organic share from the total fruit market and a
10% organic share from the total vegetable market,
Switzerland shows the highest consumption in comparison
to other European countries for the year 2000. The organic
premium for fruit and vegetable is about 40-60% at retail
price level. The strongest products are apples, pears,
potatoes, carrots, cabbage and celery. Most of the organic
fruit and vegetable products are sold in supermarket
chains. 
A strong preference for domestically produced organic
food is given. However, the import share of total organic
fruit sales (including nuts) counts 60%, the import share of
total organic vegetables only 10%.
All in all the organic import quantities are reported as
2.500 t for vegetables, 3.000 t for fresh fruits, 485 t for
dried fruits and nuts as well as 260 t for fruit juices. The
most important Non-EU supplier countries are for
Fresh vegetables: Egypt, Israel, Canada
Processed vegetables: Hungary
Fresh Fruits: Argentina, Chile, Dominican 
Republic, Israel, Mexico, Uganda, 
Fruit Juices: Brazil, Israel, Honduras, Mexico, 
Uruguay
Dried Fruits (Nuts): California, Costa Rica, Morocco, 
Tunisia
The breakdown by products gives the following picture:
Important market players in the organic fruit and
vegetable market in Switzerland are VIA VERDE AG and
BIOPARTNER (beside fresh products also engaged with
frozen vegetables, nuts and juices). Both companies are
importers and distributors delivering to the conventional
and/or specialty retail sector. Last but not least, is should
O r g a n i c  M a r k e t s  b y  R e g i o n s
229
G l o b a l  M a r k e t  P e r s p e c t i v e s  f o r  D e v e l o p i n g  C o u n t r i e s
Table 89: 
Growth Perspectives for Different Fruit and
Vegetable Products
Products 2000 2003
Fresh Vegetables Good Good
Stored Vegetables Average Average
Processed Vegetables Good Good
Fresh Fruit Good Good
Fruit Juice Good Very Good
Dried Fruits (nuts) Good Good
Table 90: 
Imports into Switzerland of Organic Fruit and
Vegetables (in Tons) – 2000
Product Quantity Product Quantity 
FRUITS VEGETABLES
Citrus fruit 2054 Cauliflower 494
Figs 335 Potatoes 456
Banana 217 Tomatoes (and products) 378
Strawberries (incl. frozen) 137 Onions 264
Peaches (incl. frozen) 125 Beetroot 167
Grapes 100 Fennel 129
Apricots 98 Cucumber 87
Apples 92 Broccoli 114
Plums 71 Diverse vegetables 186
Nectarines 68 Carrots 53
Dried apricots 40
Total 3337 Total 2328
be mentioned that the most known organic labeling
organization, BIO SUISSE, prohibits air-transportation of
organic food. 
4.2.6. The Netherlands
Organic Market in Figures and Distribution Channels
The organic retail market volume is estimated with about
331 Mio EURO in 2001 (+22% in comparison to previous
year) which is 1.2% of the total food market. According to
conservative estimations, the Dutch organic market will reach
about 3.5% by 2005. Per capita consumption of organic
food reaches a value of 17.33 EURO in the year 2000. 
The only multiplier with a high profile in marketing of
organic food is ALBERT HEIJN (Ahold-Group). In the
year 2000, 80% of all organic sales of the mainstream
retailers (or 36% of total organic sales) were realized by
Albert Heijn. The specialty retail sector offers products in
about 250 outlets organic food. About 50% of the specialty
stores are affiliated to the marketing and franchise organi-
zation NWO (Hoofdkantoor Natuurvoedings Winkel
Organisatie B.V.).
The most known organic label in the Netherlands is by
far the EKO-Label, granted by the private certification
organization SKAL (www.skal.com).
The Organic Fruit and Vegetable Market
The domestic area under organic horticultural production
was estimated with 2100 ha in the year 1999 (1800ha
vegetables, 260ha fruits and 40ha greenhouses). According
to the Productboard for Horticulture, about 65% of the
domestic organic fruit and vegetable production is
exported to other European countries (2000). As Dutch
consumers are not willingly to pay a high organic premium,
organic farmers/companies prefer to export organic
horticultural production.
A good portion of the Dutch imports of organic fruits
and vegetables are re-exported to other European countries
(especially UK, Germany, Scandinavia). EOSTA B.V. is
not only a major distributor of organic fruit and vegetables
in The Netherlands, but also throughout Europe. Other
mayor players are TRADIN (dried goods, bananas),
NATUDIS (dried goods), ZANN (fresh fruit and vegeta-
bles), ODIN (wholesaler of fresh fruit and vegetable),
ORLEMANNS (one of the largest European processor of
frozen organic potatoes and vegetables) and HAK 
O r g a n i c  M a r k e t s  b y  R e g i o n s
230
Table 91: 
Distribution Channels for Organic Food and
Beverages in the Netherlands
Distribution Channel Percentage
Conventional Supermarkets 45%
Specialty Stores 42%
Others (Direct Sales etc.) 13%
Table 92: 
Net Imports of Certified Organic Fruit and
Vegetables (in Tons)– 2000
Product Quantity Countries of origin
(in Tons)
VEGETABLES
Asparagus Less than 100 Argentina
Garlic Less than 300 Argentina
Ginger Less than 100 Brazil, Honduras, Dominican Republic
Onions 500-1.000 Argentina
Tomatoes 750-1.000 Spain, Israel
FRUIT
Apples 2.500-3.500 Chile, Argentina, Brazil
Avocados Less than 500 Mexico, Spain, Israel, South Africa
Bananas 750-1.000 Dominican Republic, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru
Citrus fruit 5.500-7.500 Italy, Spain, South Africa, Argentina, Israel, 
Australia
Grapes Less than 100 Argentina, Chile
Kiwi 2.500-3.500 New Zealand, Italy
Mango Less than 500 Burkina Faso, Guinea, Dominican Republic, 
Mexico, Israel, Brazil
Pears 1.500-2.500 USA, Argentina
(preserved fruits and vegetables). Furthermore, a
subsidiary of THE GREENERY the DISSELKOEN
ORGANICS BV plays an increasing role in the Dutch
organic fruit and vegetable market. 
The traditional position of The Netherlands as a gateway
to Europe (with its strong port Rotterdam) is relevant for
the organic sector to the same extent. 
4.2.7. United Kingdom
Organic Market in Figures and Distribution Channels
The organic retail market volume is estimated with about
1.300 Mio EURO 2000 (+ 20% in comparison to 1999)
which is 1% of the total food market. 
Supermarket chains with a high profile in marketing of
organic food are SAINSBURY, TESCO and WAITROSE. It
is expected that the supermarket chains will increase their
share of the total organic food market. However, in absolute
figures, the specialty retail sector has also shown growth in
turnover. The foundation of organic supermarket chains in
London like PLANET ORGANIC, FRESH&WILD and
HERE STORES as well as the enlargement of existing
Whole Food Stores/ Health Stores (about 1900 stores
throughout the UK) make specialty retail an important
market sector. The most recognizable organic label in
the UK is by far the label of the leading organic
labelling/certification organization SOIL ASSOCIATION
(www.soilassociation.org). 
The Organic Fruit and Vegetable Market
The total acreage for horticulture has counted 4922 ha
(2001) with 602 ha for organic fruits (apple>pears>straw-
berries) and 4318 ha for organic vegetables (potatoes>root
crops>green vegetable). Despite the fact that the organic
horticulture area in the UK has increased by 40% in the last
year, most of the organic produce has to be imported (85%
of all fruit  and  vegetables).
Fresh fruits and vegetables represent by far the most
important product category in the UK market. From the
total turnover of the organic market (2001) 33% (or
432 Mio Euro) are generated by organic fruit and
vegetables. However, with an increase of 15%, (2000/2001)
the growth rate is moderate in comparison to other categories
like baby food (65%), dairy products (40%) or meat and
sausages (65%). 
More than 85% of all organic fruit and vegetable sales
take place in supermarket chains. All outlets of UK multi-
pliers already offer at least a core assortment of organic
fruit and vegetable. Multipliers are still in the process of
extending the number of organic fruit and vegetable products
in their outlets, which is the most important driving factor
for further growth in this category. SAINSBURY, TESCO
and WAITROSE are seen as the most pro-active multipliers
regarding the organic fruit and vegetable sector. The leading
market position in the organic fruit and vegetable sector is
held by ORGANIC FARM FOOD (UK). Over the last
years, the market has become more fragmented (e.g. 30
companies mainly pre-packers for the multipliers are
engaged in the organic fruit sector).
Traditionally, organic apples and pears play an impor-
tant role in UK supermarkets. The organic share of all
pipe fruits sold in the UK has already been reached.
However, subtropical and tropical fruits are also gain-
ing more and more importance. Above all kiwi fruit (20%
organic share) and banana are very popular. With respect to
organic vegetables, the import share is expected to drop in
O r g a n i c  M a r k e t s  b y  R e g i o n s
231
G l o b a l  M a r k e t  P e r s p e c t i v e s  f o r  D e v e l o p i n g  C o u n t r i e s
Table 93: 
Distribution Channels for Organic Food and
Beverages in the Netherlands
Distribution Channel Percentage
Conventional Supermarkets 80% 
Specialty Stores 11%
Direct Sales 09%
the coming years as the domestic production increases.
Between 1998 and 2000, the market volumes almost
doubled.
In both segments, saturation effects are expected in the
coming years with the consequence of higher competition
on retail and supplier levels. Market growth is forecasted at
10-15% over the next years.
4.3. Asia
Japan – by far the largest market for organic products in Asia
and the second largest in the world – is of particular interest
for the global organic export industry. However, in an
increasing number of other Asian countries like China, India,
Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand
domestic markets for organic products are emerging. In
some of the countries mentioned, national organic schemes
are in preparation in order to develop a legal framework for
further development of the sector and/or have already been
introduced, such as in Thailand (August 2001). The afore-
mentioned does not allow genetically modified organisms,
and has developed a national logo for organic agriculture as
well as a national certification scheme for organic products.
4.3.1. Japan
Organic Market in Figures and Distribution Channels
The organic retail market volume is estimated, according to
different sources, to be around 2.5 billion US-$ (2001).
This figure also includes sales of so-called green products
that do not fulfill international norms for organic agricul-
ture. The real organic share is unclear, but has been report-
ed at 1% (350 US-$). The main distribution channels for
organic food and beverages are:
Teikei System/Consumer Cooperatives:
Traditionally, organic food was sold from the farmer to the
consumer directly. This system focuses on domestically
produced goods. In some areas, professional distributors
are charged with organizing the deliveries. More than 18 mil-
lion consumers are organized in consumer co-operatives,
organizing product procurement for its membership.
Supermarkets:
Supermarket chains are starting to extend their “pure”
organic lines. Currently, a number of so-called green products
dominates the product offering on the shelves.
O r g a n i c  M a r k e t s  b y  R e g i o n s
232
Table 94: 
UK (selected) Organic Fresh Fruit and Vegetable
Imports – 2000
Product Quantity Product Quantity
(in tons) (in tons)
VEGETABLES FRUIT
Potatoes 30.000-40.000 Bananas 20.000
Carrots 5.000-6.000 Pineapple (incl. dried) 1.000-1.200
Onions 6.000-7.000 Guavas & Mangoes 800-1.000
Legumes 1.800-2.000 Oranges 13.000-13.500
Beans 1.400-1.500 Clementines 3.500-3.800
Asparagus 80-100 Satsumas 1.500-2.000
Courgettes 920-1.000 Mandarins 500-550
Cassava 40-45 Tangerines 100-120
Sweet potatoes 300-320 Lemons 2.800-2.900
Limes 450-470
Paw paw/papayas 150-200
Strawberries 860-900
Raspberries, 50-60
blackberries, 
blueberries
TOTAL vegetables 45.540-57.965 TOTAL fruit 44.710-46.700
Home Delivery:
About 2400 Internet sites offer organic and green products
in Japan. 
The newly introduced national logo for organic food is
the JAS-Organic Logo (further details www.maff.go.jp).
In 1992 the Japanese Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry
and Fisheries (MAFF) defined voluntary guidelines
for sustainable agriculture requiring third-party
certification:
“Organic”: No chemicals have been used for more
than 3 years.
“Organic in transition”: No chemicals have been
used between 6 months and 3 years.
“No pesticides”: No chemical pesticides have been
used.
“Reduced pesticides”: Less than 50% pesticide
input than usual. 
“No chemical fertilizer grown”: No chemical fer-
tilizer have been used.
“Reduced fertilizer grown”: Less than 50% fertil-
izer input than usually.
This regulation has led not only to confusion in the
food industry but also on the part of the consumer.
The high number of so-called “pseudo-bio” products
caused consumer irritation and of course was a barrier
for further market growth. In April 2001, a new
Japanese regulation for organic agriculture was set
in motion. The future will show to what extent the
organic industry and the Japanese consumer will
accept the new regulation, which still contemplates
other “green categories”.  
The new Japanese Agriculture Standard (JAS) for
organic food also defines procedures for the impor-
tation of organic products (further details see
www.organicstandard.com). 
The Organic Fruit and Vegetable Market
With a population of about 126,7 Mio people, a good number
of urban areas (e.g. Tokyo 8,0 Mio; Yokohama 3,4 Mio;
Osaka 2,5 Mio) and a food importation rate of about 80%,
Japan has become a prime target market for organic exporters.
But import requirements, in particular for fresh fruits and
vegetables, make the entrance into the Japanese market
difficult. In combination with the high quality and/or
phytosanitary requirements27 for fresh fruits and vegetables,
legal requirements for market access have also been seen as
a major issue for exporters. 
The self-sufficiency rate for fresh vegetables is 84%,
whereas fresh fruits reach only 49%. Prices for organic
products are up to two-three times higher than conventional
ones, which underlines the immaturity of the Japanese
market. The import share of organic fruit and vegetables is
reported to be below 5%. The main reason is the fact that
almost 70% of all deliveries of fresh fruit and vegetables to
Japan are fumigated. According to the new national organic
regulation. (since the 1st of April) fumigated deliveries lose
their organic status, which was not the case before.
27 Exporters are running the risk to loose the organic status for their
products because imported fresh products must be fumigated at
random according to the Japanese law.
O r g a n i c  M a r k e t s  b y  R e g i o n s
233
G l o b a l  M a r k e t  P e r s p e c t i v e s  f o r  D e v e l o p i n g  C o u n t r i e s
Table 95: 
Forecast of Certified Organic Fresh Fruit and
Vegetable – Imports 2001
Fruits Quantity Vegetables Quantity
(in tons) (in tons)
Mango 10 Asparagus 100
Avocado 50 Onion 200
Orange 135 Pumpkin 2.000
Grapefruit 300 Carrot 400
Kiwi 2.300 Ginger 50
Banana 11.000
TOTAL 13.795 TOTAL 2.750
Consumer interviews have shown the following preferences
for organic fruit and vegetables:
Fresh vegetables: onions, carrots, sweet potatoes
Fresh fruits: apples, mandarins, strawberries
Frozen vegetables: french fried, asparagus, mixed 
vegetables, pumpkin
Canned products: corn, mandarins, asparagus
Juices: apple, vegetables, tomato, orange
The value of all imported organic products is reported
at 90 Mio US-$ (1999). 
Most important supplying countries for fruit and vegetables
are New Zealand, Australia and USA. A good portion of the
total organic export of New Zealand is sold on the Japanese
market, above all kiwi-fruit, squash and onions. Analysis of
organic fruit and vegetable products from the United States
gives the following picture:
Fresh Vegetables (and Herbs):
carrots, peppers, broccoli, basil, oregano, rosemary, thyme
Fresh Fruits:
apple, grapes, oranges, lemons, blueberries, grapefruits
Dried Fruits:
Raisins
Furthermore, the Japanese organic food industry devel-
oped strong relationships to organic producers in neighboring
countries such as China and Korea. It is expected that an
increasing part of the organic imports (including fruit and veg-
etable) will originate from these countries in the future.
However, main sourcing areas for exotic fruits such as bananas
are the Philippines, Dominican Republic, Colombia and
Ecuador. Other organic fruits and vegetables are imported
from South-American countries such as Chile and Argentina.
With respect to the high risk (legal fumigation procedure)
of importing organic fresh produce, it might be wise to
concentrate on the processed organic food. In this context,
the Japanese market offers good perspectives regarding
convenience food (bagged salads), frozen vegetables (french
fries, mixed vegetables), fruit pulps (banana, mango) and
fruit juices (guava, oranges). 
4.3.2. Singapore
The organic market is estimated with 3.5 Mio US-$ at retail
price level. All organic food has to be imported.
Source: FAS-Report Organic Products in Singapore (2001)
The major distribution channel is the mainstream retailer
NTUC FAIRPRICE. This retail chain with about 41 outlets
gave a sales area for organic food to the major importer of
organic food in Singapore, ORIGINS HEALTH FOOD
Ltd., on a concessional basis. Other conventional super-
market chains such as COLD STORAGE and SHOP &
SAVE offer only a very limited range of organic food.
Beside the conventional supermarkets, more and more
organic food is sold in specialty retail stores like 
NATURES FARM, FAMILY HEALTH FOODS, ORGANIC
PARADIESE, ORGANIC NETWORK and others. Currently,
most of the fresh organic fruit and vegetable products are
supplied by Australian growers.
O r g a n i c  M a r k e t s  b y  R e g i o n s
234
Table 96: 
Organic Food Market Structure in 2000
(Estimated) 
Food Items % Share of Market
Fresh fruits and vegetables 10%
Non-alcoholic beverages, e.g. juices and cider vinegar 15%
Flours, pulses and lentils etc. 20%
Confectionery items, including spreads 5%
Breakfast cereals, cereal bars and snack foods 5%
Chilled and frozen products, including meat 5%
Other items, e.g. coffee, tea, sugar, edible oils, canned 25% 
foods, specialty foods and wines
Total 100%
4.4. Organic Markets in
Developing Countries
The last chapter is aimed at highlighting that markets for
organic food and in particular organic fresh fruit and veg-
etables also exist in developing countries. The exploration
of the domestic market offer export-oriented companies an
additional business, reducing the risks of international
commodity trading and allowing domestic companies (with
less and/or no experience in the export business) to enter
the organic business. 
In addition to the aforementioned emerging organic
markets in different Asian countries, successful examples
are also present in other regions of the world. In many
South American countries (Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay),
the conventional supermarket chains have started to develop
organic product lines. In spite of the fact that the overall
number of organic items is still very small, the offering of
fresh organic fruit and vegetables is quite impressive. In
Argentina supermarket chains like JUMBO and DISCO
(Ahold-Group), in Brazil PAO DE AZUCAR, CAR-
REFOUR and others are already offering organic fruit and
vegetables. 
Another example is the SEKEM-Group in Egypt. This
group represents more than 1000 biodynamic farmers pro-
ducing, in addition to fruit and vegetables, a wide range of
dried goods (like grains, pulses, groundnuts etc.). SEKEM
is exporting mainly to European markets. Additionally, a
domestic marketing concept was carried out over the last
few years. Today, SEKEM is selling a whole range of
organic products not only in own shops in Cairo but also in
different supermarket chains all over the country.
The organic markets in East European countries like
Poland, Hungary or Czech Republic are also at a very early
stage of development. However, more and more supermarket
chains have started to offer at least a small range of organic
food items. In the mid-term these markets will offer additional
export perspectives. 
O r g a n i c  M a r k e t s  b y  R e g i o n s
235
G l o b a l  M a r k e t  P e r s p e c t i v e s  f o r  D e v e l o p i n g  C o u n t r i e s

P A R T
Standard and Regulations
D
Requirements and Conditions Relating
to Organic Trade
5
Standards relating to organic food products are production
and processing standards that describe, prescribe, allow or
prohibit procedures and materials. Standards for certi-
fication and labeling are also involved.
Characteristics of organic food standards:
< Standards are defining production methods; their main
focus is not the product quality;
< Organic food standards regulate minimum 
requirements for organic food production, not best
practice;
< International standards or guidelines, national 
regulations and regional standards exist.
< A large number of private standards currently exist.
They are continuously developed by producer 
organizations. In 1980, the International Federation 
of Organic Agriculture Movements (IFOAM) finalized
the first International Basic Standards for Organic
Agriculture, which were further developed at a later
date (see below).
< The first national regulations were developed in
France and in Denmark in the late 80´s. In 1991, the
EU introduced the EU Regulation 2092/91 for organic
food. This regulation has been further developed and
amended several times by the authorities in Brussels.
< In 1999 the Codex Alimentarius Program, a joint 
governmental WHO/FAO Program finalized
International Guidelines for organically produced
food; this program is also in the process of further
development.
5.1 General Trade Constraints,
Customs and Tax Regulations
The European Union (EU) has a Common Agricultural
Policy (CAP), a common commercial policy and common
import and customs regulations for imports from outside
the EU. Organic products are subject to the same customs
tariffs as conventional products. 
The ACP-EU Partnership Agreement (Cotonou 2000)
forms the basis for developing long-term cooperation
between the EU countries and the 69 African-Caribbean-
Pacific countries (ACP countries). The Agreement provides
for preferential tariffs for the ACP countries. It also provides
for “general preferential tariffs for developing countries”.
Products from the Least Developed Countries are duty free.
In order to take advantage of preferential tariffs, imported
goods must be accompanied by a certificate of origin. 
The Common Agricultural Policy applies quantitative
restrictions and special charges for agricultural imports
(depending on the product, the season and country of origin).
These also apply to organic products. Importers must apply
for an import license. 
The current World Trade Organization (WTO) reform
negotiations are pushing forward towards liberalization of
trade in agricultural products based on the resolutions of
the GATT Uruguay Round. A key element in this is the
commitment on the part of the industrialized countries to
reduce customs tariffs and export subsidies by a further
13–24% by the year 2004. The aim of the WTO is to facilitate
access for emerging economies and economies in transition
to industrialized countries markets.
R e q u i r e m e n t s  a n d  C o n d i t i o n s  R e l a t i n g  t o  O r g a n i c  T r a d e
238
5.2. Importing Goods into the EU,
USA and Switzerland
The regulations on imports in the EU Regulation on
organic production are of great significance for the inter-
national market for organic products. Article 11 of the EU
Regulation governs market access for organic food products
in the countries of the EU. It requires that organic foods
imported into the EU from third party countries must have
been produced, processed and certified in accordance with
equivalent standards. The exporting country must give
details of the standards and inspection procedures imple-
mented for evaluation by the EU. In this respect, the
requirements and conditions relating to access for organic
products are comparable to those laid down in the Swiss
Organic Farming Ordinance28. Enforcement is the responsi-
bility of the EU Member States, although in Germany it is
in fact carried out at the level of the German federal states
(Länder). Further details may be found in the EU
Regulation on organic production29.
At the present time there are two ways of authorizing
imports into the EU:
< Access via the List of Third Countries in accordance
with Art. 11, paragraphs 1–5: A country or certification
body may apply to be added to the list of third countries
(EU Third Countries List) via its diplomatic represen-
tatives in Brussels. In order to be added to this list, the
country making the application must already have
enacted organic farming legislation and a fully functional
system of inspection and monitoring must be in place.
In addition, it must provide an confirmation of equiva-
lence and other information on organic farming methods
applied in the country. The application is then assessed
and decided upon by the European Commission. To
date only 5 countries have been included on the list:
Argentina, Australia, Hungary, Israel and Switzerland.
Goods imported from these countries need only be
accompanied by a consignment-specific certificate of
inspection. 
< Access via Import Permit in accordance with Art. 11,
paragraph 6, for all countries not included on the list of
third countries (i.e. the vast majority of imports into the
EU). As a rule, certification bodies operating at the
international level will assist exporters and importers in
putting together all the information and evidence needed
to accompany the application for an import permit.
Requirements vary from one EU country to another, but
the following are those that generally apply: the
exporter applies for inspection by one of the European
certification bodies that is approved and accredited in
the EU (where possible with local inspectors).
Inspection contracts set out the schedule for annual
inspections. National certification bodies are subject to
annual assessments by an EU-accredited certification
body specially assigned to this task. In some EU
countries, national certification bodies may be exempted
from this annual assessment if they participate in the
accreditation program of IFOAM. After the import
permit has been issued by the designated inspection
body, then either the exporter must ensure that the
organic goods from the third country are accompanied
by a certificate of inspection, or the importer must be
able to produce a certificate of inspection for each
consignment imported from the third country.
Within the EU all organic products may be freely traded.
However, procedures relating to the issue of import
permits are not the same in all EU countries. It is advisable
to seek advice from the relevant authorities before trading
commences.
28 See website information in the annex.
29 for details please consult the handbook “The Market for Organic Food
and Beverages”; see chapter 4.6 
R e q u i r e m e n t s  a n d  C o n d i t i o n s  R e l a t i n g  t o  O r g a n i c  T r a d e
239
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
Some Points Relevant for US Importers
The new National Organic Program regulations require
businesses selling food labeled as “organic” in the US to
follow the new US standards for the production and handling
of organic foods. This includes organic food imported into
the US. The National Organic Standards require all agri-
cultural products sold, labeled or represented as organic in
the United States be certified by a U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) accredited certifying agent. However,
in lieu of organic certif ication by a USDA accredited
certifying agent, imported organic agricultural product
may be sold in the United States if they have been certified
and recognized through:
1) a USDA recognition of conformity assessment or 
2) an equivalency determination.
Under the recognition of conformity assessment option,
imported organic agricultural product may be sold, labeled,
or represented as organically produced if the product is
produced and handled to the National Organic Standards
and certified by an accredited certifying agent recognized by
USDA. Recognition of certifying agents will be determined
by the USDA, based upon the request of a foreign government,
certifying that the foreign certifying agent’s government is
able to assess and accredit certifying agents as meeting the
requirements of the USDA National Organic Program.
Imported organic agricultural product may also be sold,
labeled or represented as organic when USDA has determined
a foreign government’s organic certification program to be
equivalent to that of the NOP. Equivalent means that USDA
has determined that a foreign government’s technical
requirements and conformity assessment system adequately
fulfil the objectives of the Organic Food Production Act
and its implementing regulations. Determinations of equiv-
alency are the most complex and time-consuming types of
import arrangements to establish. Outside the US, certifi-
cation agencies based in Canada, Europe, Latin American,
and Oceania, are either applying for USDA accreditation,
or waiting for their governments to negotiate equivalency
of their national organic programs with the US program.
Although the USDA will accept foreign accreditation
applicants, it has announced that it will also accept organic
products certified in countries with which the US has an
equivalency or an acceptance agreement. To date, there are
no such agreements, and only informal, preliminary com-
munication with other countries has occurred. For example,
USDA is currently working with India to determine
whether their organic certification programs are equivalent
to the technical requirements and conformity assessment
system of the NOP. 
The US Organic Foods Production Act
The US Organic Foods Production Act (OFPA) was
signed into law October 1990, the final rule was
published in December 2000. Purposes:
• To establish national standards governing the
marketing of certain agricultural products as
organically produced products; 
• To assure consumers that organically produced
products meet a consistent standard; and 
• To facilitate interstate commerce in fresh and
processed food that is organically produced
(however, states can have more strict standards).
Not covered in OFPA:
Private requirements in addition to NOP Standards
Equivalent standards from Trading Partners.
Some Points Relevant for Swiss Importers
< The exporter in the EU must apply for a Swiss import
certificate from his inspection body and ensure that
the product bears the code number and name of the
inspection body and that it is labeled “bio” (organic). 
< If a product has been approved in accordance with EU
Regulation No. 2092/91 on Organic Food Production,
then it can be approved automatically as organic in
Switzerland too, and vice versa. An exception is made
R e q u i r e m e n t s  a n d  C o n d i t i o n s  R e l a t i n g  t o  O r g a n i c  T r a d e
240
in the case of products from farms in the process of
conversion. When a conversion product from the EU,
or another country, is imported into Switzerland, this
must be specifically declared.
< In order to comply with the requirements of private
labeling schemes, conditions such as whole-farm 
conversion and other additional conditions may be
imposed on imports from abroad, i.e. also on those
from the EU. 
< Import requirements from countries outside the EU
and from countries on the Country List are similar 
to those found in EU-regulation. Analogously to the
EU, Switzerland also operates a system of “individual
authorization”. For direct imports from countries 
that are not included on the list of third countries, the
importer in Switzerland must submit an application 
for individual authorization to the Federal Office for
Agriculture (FOAG) together with an attestation of
equivalence for the relevant product and its producer. 
R e q u i r e m e n t s  a n d  C o n d i t i o n s  R e l a t i n g  t o  O r g a n i c  T r a d e
241
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
Principles of Inspection and
Certification of Organic Products
6
6.1. Requirements Relating to
Inspection Bodies
Since January 1988, all inspection bodies accredited in the
EU must satisfy the requirements of the EN 45011 standards
(these are identical to ISO Guide 65; both set out general
standards for certification bodies) in order to be deemed as
suitable imports of organic goods to be approved by the
European authorities. Because of equivalency requirement,
this also applies to all inspection bodies in third countries
from which certified products are imported into Europe. In
other words, it also applies to local inspection bodies in
emerging markets and markets in transition. There are three
options for going about this:
1. The inspection body is accredited by an accreditation
body in accordance with EN 45011 standards. 
The accreditation body must be a member of the 
EA-MLA (European co-operation for Accreditation)
or the IAF-MLA (International Accreditation Forum).
2. The inspection body has been approved by a 
competent authority in the third country in accordance
with EN 45011 or ISO Guide 65. 
3. The inspection body has been assessed by a qualified
expert in accordance with EN 45011 or ISO Guide 65.
The assessment has been confirmed by a supervisory
authority in the EU.
All three options are valid in all of the countries of the
EU. At the present time, confirmation of assessments
carried out by experts under option 3 is only undertaken by
German authorities. Confirmation by a German authority
is, however, recognized in all of the EU countries. In
Germany, the primary view is that in many third countries
option 2 does not exist and secondly, there are only very
few accreditation organizations corresponding to option 1.
A checklist is obtainable from the German interstate work-
ing group of organic control authorities30 giving details of
how an expert assessment in accordance with options 1, 2
and 3 should be carried out.
The EU countries have not reached any agreement as to
whether they should recognize IFOAM as an accreditation
organization under option 1 or 3. The IFOAM accreditation
program, and International Organic Accreditation Service
(IOAS), have been recognized thus far primarily in some
Scandinavian countries. IOAS accreditation is not recog-
nized by the EU authorities because IOAS is not a member
of any of the organizations mentioned above (EA-MLA,
IAF-MLA). 
Surveillance of a local inspection body by a certifi-
cation body accredited in the EU is no longer carried
out the way it used to be; this now comes under options
1 to 3.
This however is NOT relevant for countries outside
Europe
30 Länderarbeitsgemeinschaft zur Verordnung EWG 2092/01, LÖK.
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
242
6.2. Certification of Organic
Production
6.2.1. Frequently Asked Questions
(FQA)
Can all naturally produced produce be sold 
as organic?
No, most organic import markets, such as e.g. the European
Union or the United States have set up a legal framework,
e.g. a regulation, to define the requirements for products to
be labeled and marketed as “organic products”. These
regulations always include the requirement that all steps of
production be certified by an accredited certification
agency. Furthermore, organic requirements comprise far
more aspects than merely the lack of chemical inputs. All
requirements are outlined in more detail in the chapter
“Requirements for certification”.
What is organic certification?
Certification is a procedure for verifying that products
conform to certain standards. In the case of organic products,
it is primarily the acknowledgement that such products
have been produced according to the applicable organic
production standards. 
How to become certified?
In order to apply for certification, operators need to contact
one or several accredited organic certification agencies and
describe their present operation and plan for organic pro-
duction. The certification agency will prepare an offer with
cost estimation and a description of services. As soon as the
operator has chosen the certification agency and signed an
inspection contract with them, he is officially in the certifi-
cation process. Then the first inspection will be conducted
to verify whether or not the operation is in compliance with
the organic standard for which certification is sought. As a
result of the certifier’s evaluation and certification process,
the operation will receive a certificate and/or certification
notification in which certain corrective measures might be
required. In the certification decision, the operator will be
informed on his organic status (i.e. as which quality he can
label his produce, e.g. organic in conversion) and can sell
his produce accordingly.
Is the same certification valid world-wide?
There are different organic markets with their own individual
certification requirements, i.e. their own regulations and
standards. Therefore, produce that is e.g. exported to
Europe must be certified according to a regulation equivalent
to the EU-Regulation for organic farming; produce exported
to the US must, from this year onwards, be certified accord-
ing to the USDA National Organic Program, etc. However,
most major certification agencies offer certification
according to the most common organic markets. Applicants
therefore might need to inform said entities as to which
import market they are targeting.
Are the same organic labels used world-wide?
In addition to official legislation defining which requirements
products must fulfill in order to be labeled as “organic pro-
duce”, there is presently a vast number of organic labels that
can be both private or governmental. Nowadays, many of these
labels serve marketing purposes, i.e. in different countries
where consumers traditionally trust certain organic labels. All
private labels must have at least the same minimum require-
ments as the underlying organic regulation (e.g. Regulation
(EEC) N° 2092/91 for all organic labels in Europe), but often
they have additional requirements or emphasis on 
certain aspects more than others. Examples for popular
organic labels in the EU and Switzerland are: Demeter
(world-wide standard for bio-dynamic farming), Soil
Association (UK), Bio Suisse (Switzerland), Naturland
(Germany), KRAV (Sweden), EKO (Holland), AB (France).
Which organic label might be most useful for your mar-
keting efforts, in addition to the compulsory organic certi-
fication according to the organic regulation, is best decided
while defining future customers and major export markets.
For more information, please refer to the chapter organic
standards/private labels.
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
243
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
How soon can produce be exported as organic?
The requirements concerning the so-called conversion period
for organic produce, i.e. the time for which a farm has to
be cultivated organically before the crops can be sold as
organic, differs slightly between organic standards. For
products with Europe as a destination, the required conversion
period is defined as 36 months before harvest for per-annual
crops (e.g. fruit trees) or 24 months before sowing for
annual crops (e.g. vegetables). For detailed comments
regarding the conversion period, please refer to the chapter
certification requirements.
Can a farm produce both organic and 
conventional crops?
According to most organic regulations, but not necessarily
according to private standards, a farm may cultivate two differ-
ent units. This means that part of the fields can be cultivated
organically, i.e. according to the organic production rules, and
other fields are cultivated with conventional farming methods,
i.e.. using synthetic pesticides or fertilizers. However, the same
crop variety may not be produced organically and convention-
ally (with some exceptions) and many additional separation
requirements need to be fulfilled. Please refer to the chapter
certification requirements for more details.
Is organic production equivalent to natural or 
sustainable production?
No, one of the most significant factors distinguishing
organic farming from other concepts of sustainable farming
is the existence of binding production standards and cer-
tification procedures31. This means that only produce that is
produced and certif ied according to the relevant stan-
dard can be currently sold and labeled as organic pro-
duce. These organic standards comprise a couple of
requirements that would not intuitively be seen as
requirements for sustainable farming.
31 International Trade Center (ITC), 1999, Organic Food and Beverages:
World Supply and Major European Markets, UNCTAD/WTO.
Why do processors and traders also need 
to be certified?
Manufacturers and traders of organic produce also need to
be covered in the organic certification procedures. This
requirement can basically be explained with the necessity
to supervise the whole chain of custody in order to ensure
that what arrives to the consumer is actually the same
organic product originally cultivated, and that only permitted
ingredients and auxiliaries have been used it its production.
Can products be sold as organic on the local market?
Principally the term “organic” is not protected unless it is
defined in a legal act. Many countries world-wide are
presently establishing their own organic standards, defin-
ing which requirements products need to fulfill in order to
be sold as organic. If there is no such regulation or standard
in place in your country, you are of course free to label and
sell your natural produce as organic. This may, however,
require a lot of marketing effort, since people may not be
familiar with the organic production concept and may not
trust in your claim that the produce is “organic”. However,
more and more local markets for organic produce have
developed over the past years. Local certification schemes
have also developed, and it may be very interesting to
explore this marketing option.
What is the advantage of organic certification 
if being already an organic farmer
Basically your only advantage is that you can then market and
label your produce as organic, which might be particularly
interesting for export. Of course there is also the advantage
that you will receive professional support in setting up an
appropriate quality management, perhaps even improving
your production quality and methods while simultaneously
seeking organic consultancy. However, if you only intend to
produce crops in your home garden for home consumption
and local sales (and no local demand for certified organ-
ic produce), then is most probably advantageous to manage
your fields organically, but without having this production
certified as organic.
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
244
How does the Export of Organic Products
Differ from the Export of Conventional
Produce?
Broader company objectives: In addition to pure
economic objectives, ecological and social aspects
must also be considered. The latter form the basis of a
firm’s credibility with its customers, and this in turn is
the foundation for a long-term business relationship.
Quality: Most of the consumers of organic food
have high expectations in terms of product quality.
Organic products must usually meet the same quality
standards as conventionally produced goods. Only
slight allowances are made in the case of fruit. The
requirements also relate to food packaging. It is
common practice to provide the importer or potential
customer a representative sample of the organically
produced products. On this basis, an agreement can
be reached with the trading partner as to whether the
quality standards are sufficient to satisfy market
requirements.
Logistics: Some private certification standards for
organic food do not allow import by air. In addition,
during transportation organic food products may only
be sprayed with pesticides or cleaning agents that are
specially permitted for use in organic agriculture. 
Packaging and labeling: Packaging must be free
from pesticides, colorings, solvents or cleaning agents
that could contaminate organic food. Organic food
products must be labeled in accordance with the reg-
ulations laid down by national/supranational organ-
ic regulations.
Certification: To have an imported product passed
as “organic” in EU, USA, Japan, Switzerland etc.,
the producers, processors, exporters and importers
must undergo inspection and certification at least
once a year by an accredited organic inspection and
certification body.
Access to the market: products from emerging mar-
kets and markets in transition are regulated by
means of regulations on equivalence. The production,
processing, inspection, certification and labeling of
organic products in emerging markets and markets
in transition must take place according to the
requirements that are equivalent to those of the
national/supranational organic food regulations.
This is not to say that identical procedures are
imposed. In fact, it is desirable to adapt organic
farming standards to local conditions and make use
of certification bodies in the emerging markets and
markets in transition.
6.2.2. Organic Standards: Types of
Organic Standards
There is at present no regulation on organic products
applicable world-wide and a confusing number of organic
standards make orientation of organic operators, especially
in developing countries, quite difficult. The main organic
standard types can be summarized as follows:
A) International private or intergovernmental framework
standards, such as IFOAM International Basic Standard
or the Codex Alimentarius.
B) Baseline Regulatory Standards and Regulations such as
the EU Regulation (EEC) N° 2092/91  or the American
USDA National Organic Program
C) Private Organic Label Standards
International framework standards (A), such as in
particular the IFOAM Basic Standard, aim to harmonize
different certification programs by providing a uniform
framework for organic standards world-wide. They cannot
be used directly as a basis for certification, and as such are
not directly applicable to organic operators in tropical countries.
However, it may be helpful to understand the underlying
principles and issues in all organic certification programs
world-wide. 
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
245
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
Baseline regulatory standards (B) regulate certain
organic markets, i.e. contribute a legal basis for the minimum
requirements that a product and its production process have
to fulfill in order to label and market it as “organic”. Most
organic regulatory standards define the requirements for
organic production and labeling within the applicable market
but also define certain import requirements. 
The most important regulated organic markets are 
< The European Union with its regulation on organic
Production Regulation (EEC) N° 2092/91 
< The US organic market with its National Organic
Program that will come into force in October 21,
2002.
< The Japanese organic market with its JAS Standard
< Switzerland, Israel, Argentina, Czech Republic,
Hungary, Australia have set up organic regulations 
that are considered equivalent to the Regulation (EEC)
N° 2092/91. 
< Many other importing and exporting countries 
world-wide are presently developing their own organic
regulatory standards
These regulations have in common that they all regulate
market access for imports of organic food. The EU regula-
tion 2092/91 serves as a model for other national and
supranational regulations for two reasons: 
< The EU-regulation was the first regulation that 
laid down minimum requirements and is therefore 
a pioneer in this subject.
< EU is the most important import market for organic
food products. Most producers and exporters from
developing countries and markets in transition 
therefore must comply with the EU-regulation. 
In addition to these compulsory minimum standards for
organic produce, there is a large number of private organic
standards (C) that generally existed before the regulatory
framework standards came into force. These private stan-
dards currently principally serve marketing purposes, i.e.
according to the country of sale different standards may fur-
ther facilitate the marketing of the organic produce given
that consumers associate organic quality with this particu-
lar label. These private standards include all requirements
of the underlying regulatory standard and sometimes
exceed these regulations in certain aspects. Examples for
private label standards of importance for international pro-
ducers are: Demeter (world-wide) Naturland (Germany),
Soil Association (UK), KRAV (Sweden), Bio Suisse
(Switzerland). The major private labels are described below
in more detail.
6.2.3. International Regulations
(IFOAM, Codex Alimentarius) 
IFOAM Basic Standards
The extent and progress of organic agriculture in many
countries have been enhanced substantially by the develop-
ment of a set of principles, requirements, and guidelines for
organic farming and processing commonly referred to as Basic
Standards. This evolved into the International Federation of
Organic Agriculture Movements (IFOAM) Basic Standards
which have been agreed by the IFOAM General Assembly
for the first time in 1980. It reflects the collective knowl-
edge and practices of IFOAM members who, in 1972, came
from five countries of Europe and now from 115 countries
representing over 700 member organizations. 
The IFOAM Basic standards are recognized worldwide
and, as a “living” document, it is continuously evaluated
and constantly improved through a democratic process
every two years when IFOAM holds its General Assembly.
The IFOAM Basic Standards seeks to clarify the practices
and procedures approved in organic agriculture; those that
may be accepted, and those that are to be prohibited. In each
area they clearly describe the underlying guiding principles,
give recommendations for the direction to go and clearly
indicate the relevant requirements 
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
246
The IFOAM Basic Standards cannot be used for certifi-
cation on their own. They are standards for standards,
providing a framework for certification programs world wide
to develop their own national or regional standards. These
will take into account local conditions and may well be
stricter than the IFOAM Basic Standards. The IFOAM Basic
Standards also forms the basis from which the IFOAM
Accreditation program operates. More than 20 certification
programs worldwide are accredited by IFOAM.
Codex Alimentarius Guidelines
The Codex Alimentarius Commission was established
in 1962 as a joint intergovernmental body of the UN
Organizations FAO/WHO, with the objectives of protecting
the consumer’s health and facilitating international trade in
food through the harmonization of food standards on a
world-wide basis. Codex standards, codes and related texts
have received wider acknowledgement following the conclu-
sion of the WTO (World Trade Organization) ”Agreement
on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures” (SPS) and Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT), as
Codex was specifically mentioned under SPS, while the
reference to international standards in the framework of TBT
applies to Codex. Codex standards and related texts also play
an important role in providing guidance to member countries
when they develop or update their national regulations.
Codex recommendations cover all aspects of food safety
and quality, including labeling, and inspection and certifica-
tion systems. The Codex Committee on Food Labeling is
responsible for all food-labeling matters, such as the definitions
of certain claims commonly found in the market, in order to
provide clear information to the consumer.
The Codex Alimentarius began in 1991 with the elaboration
of Guidelines for the production, processing, labeling and
marketing of organically produced food. In June 1999, the
plant production began and in July 2001, animal production
was approved by the Codex Commission. The requirements
in these Codex Guidelines are in line with IFOAM Basic
Standards and the EU-Regulation for organic food
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
247
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
Table 97: 
Main Differences Among the IFOAM Basic Standards, the Codex Guidelines, and the EU-Regulation 2092/91
Items IFOAM Basic Standards 2002 Codex Alimenta-rius Organic Guidelines 1999/2001 EU-Regulation 2092/91 (incl. Amendments) 
for organically produced food
Scope food and non-food, including fish, textiles mainly food food and non-food 
(new draft) etc.
Conversion farm or farm unit, minimum 1 years before harvest, farm or farm unit, minimum 2 years before harvest, farm or farm unit, minimum 2 years before harvest, 
perennials 2 years perennials 3 years perennials 3 years  
Landscape/ only a recommendation to national bodies only a recommendation only a recommendation
Biodiversity
Fertilization comparable list, clear criteria list for new inputs comparable lists, exclusion of manure from factory comparable lists, only manure from extensive farming 
farming, 
Pest and disease comparable list comparable list comparable list
control
GMO products excluded excluded excluded 
Animal rather detailed, developed as a framework for national developed more as a framework for national bodies very detailed regulation, especially for poultry 
husbandry organizations
Processing elaborated criteria list for new additives and processing criteria list in further elaboration, for animal products Little developed criteria, no developed list for animal  
aids, detailed list very restrictive list products yet 
Labeling conversion label after 2nd year allowed. Mixed Conversion label after 2nd year allowed. Mixed conversion label after 2nd year allowed. Mixed products  
products with >95% organic: full labeling; 70% products with >95% organic: full labeling; 70% with >95% organic: full labeling; 70% products: labeling  
products: emphasis labeling; products with <70% only products: labeling on the ingredients list, only allowed on the ingredients list   
on the ingredients list on a national level
Source: Otto Schmid, FiBL
(2092/91, 1804/99). These Codex guidelines clearly define
the nature of organic food production and prevent claims
that could mislead consumers about the quality of the
product or the way it was produced. There are differences
with regard to the details and the areas that are covered by
the different standards (see table 97).
The Codex Alimentarius Guidelines are important for
the harmonization of international rules geared towards
building up consumer trust. They will be important for
equivalence judgments under the rules of WTO. In order to
develop the market for organically produced food, the
Codex Guidelines also give guidance to governments in
developing national regulations for Organic Food. These
Codex Guidelines for organically produced food will be
regularly reviewed at least every four years based on given
Codex procedures. The final adoption is done by the Codex
Alimentarius Commission. The Codex-Alimentarius-
Guidelines on undertaken agriculture can be downloaded
from the web (see Annex 1-B).
6.2.4. The European Regulation on
Organic Production
In the Member States of the EU, plant products are governed
by Regulation No. 2092/91, in effect since 1993, while
products from organically managed livestock are governed
by EU Regulation No. 1804/99, enacted in August 2000.
The EU Regulation applies to non-processed crop and animal
products (incl. honey, but no fishery products), processed
agricultural products intended for human consumption and
to animal feed. 
The regulation also defines two different possibilities
for import of organic food produce originating from non-EU
member countries.
These regulations constitute an important step towards
consumer protection. They protect producers from unfair
competition and protect consumers from pseudo-organic
products. Plant and animal products, and processed
agricultural goods imported into the EU, may only be
labeled using terms such as “organic” in English and
“biologisch” or “ökologisch” in German, etc., if they
conform to the provisions of the EU Regulation.
The EU Regulation on organic production lays down
minimum rules regulating the production, processing and
import of organic products, including inspection procedures,
labeling and marketing, for the whole of Europe. In other
words, the Regulation defines what constitutes an authentic,
certified organic product. Each European country is
responsible for enforcement and for its own monitoring and
inspection system. Applications, supervision and sanctions
are dealt with at regional level. At the same time, each
country has a certain degree of freedom with regards to
how it interprets the Regulation on organic production and
how it implements the Regulation in its national context. 
The EU-Regulation 
• Council Regulation EEC No. 2092/91 and
more than 20 amendments
• Set in force 1991 by European parliament
• Protecting consumers, preventing fraud, 
creating transparency
• Regulating labeling, certification and 
international trade
• Harmonization within the EU
Content:
Article 5: Labeling may refer only to 
organic production if produced 
according to these rules  
Article 6: rules of production
Annex I: Principles of organic farming at
the farm level
Annex II: lists of permitted products
Article 8 and 9: requirements for inspection 
systems and certification 
programs.
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
248
Labeling Requirements
The rules for labeling of organic produce (Art. 5) clearly
define that products may only refer to organic production
methods if they are produced in accordance with the
production rules and certified according to the inspection
rules as laid down in this Regulation. All usual common
terms for organic in the different member states are equally
protected in their use (e.g. “biologisch” in German,
“écologico” in Spanish, “biologique” in French). Also
included in the labeling rules are all requirements
concerning the composition of a processed organic product.
Briefly summarized, processed organic produce must
contain at least 95% organic ingredients to be labeled as
organic produce (with various restrictions concerning all
other ingredients or auxiliaries/additives) or at least 70%
organic ingredients in order to indicate the organic quality
of certain ingredients on the ingredient statement.
Products containing less than 70% organic ingredients
may not write any indication or reference to organic
production on their label. The rules for processing
organic products are outlined in more detail in the chapter
certification requirements.
Organic Crop Production Requirements
The organic plant production standards as defined in
Article 6 and the Annex I and II (and Annex III regarding
conventional production) include the following requirements: 
< fertilization and plant protection by natural methods
using  if necessary certain products that are listed as
permitted inputs in the related Annexes of the
Regulation: plant-protection (Annex II, part B), 
fertilizers and soil conditioners (Annex II, part A)
< only organically produced seeds or propagation 
material may be used (certain exceptions defined)
< genetically modified organisms or their derivates must
not be used 
< the same crop variety may not be produced in the
organic and the conventional unit of a farm.
< Definition of the minimum conversion period, i.e. the
period that the organic production rules must have
been fulfilled until a product can be certified as 
organic. The minimum conversion period is 36 months
before harvest for perennial crops and 24 months prior
to sowing for annual crops.
For information on livestock production see chapter 6.5.
Inspection Requirements
The inspection rules as defined by Art. 8 & Art. 9 as well as
Annex III (Minimum control requirements) outline the
following requirements:
< All operators that handle (produce, process, re-pack,
label, import, store, export) organic produce are 
subject to inspection and certification by an approved
certification body
< There has to be at least one physical inspection a year,
covering all production and preparation units or other
premises. In addition the inspection body shall 
conduct random inspection visits, announced or not. 
< Documentary accounts: the operator has to keep
detailed documentation on all production measures,
agricultural inputs used, harvested quantities, 
incoming as well as outgoing products, all purchased
goods used as ingredients/auxiliaries in processing 
of organic goods.
< Organic products need to be continuously physically
labeled with their origin, organic quality and the
responsible certification agency. This also applies 
to all relevant documentation.
< Detailed description of all necessary inspection 
measures to be applied by the certification agencies;
standards regarding the obligations and requirements
for organic certification agencies.
Import Provisions
Organic food products originating from a non-EU member
country may be imported and marketed as organic in the
EU, if it is accepted that the products are produced and
certified according to procedures equivalent to those of
the EU. 
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
249
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
There are two ways of meeting the requirements for
equivalence:
< The country of the exporter has been accepted by 
the EU as having equivalent standards and inspection
measures and has therefore been added to the so-called
Art.11-list of third countries (“third country list”).
Exports from such countries is much facilitated and no
individual authorizations are necessary. Currently the
following countries are listed on the  Art.11 list:
Switzerland, Israel, Argentina, Australia, Hungary,
Czech Republic.
< An individual EU member country can authorize individual
importers to market produce from a certain exporter as
organic within the member state. In order to gain this 
permission, importers apply for import authorizations
(also called individual authorizations) to their competent
authority and support the application by appropriate 
documentation (usually issued by the certification body
of the exporter) to confirm that the products are produced
and certified according to rules equivalent to those of the
EU. Since presently the bulk of products entering the EU
is covered by individual import permits32 and procedures
vary between different countries of import, import 
procedures with import authorizations are explained in
more detail in the chapter import procedures.
As soon as organic products have been imported (custom
cleared) with a valid import authorization and the required
certificate of inspection (import certificate, transaction 
certificate) has been issued, they can circulate freely within
all countries of the European Union from one certified
operator to another.
32 International Trade Center (ITC), 1999, Organic Food and Beverages:
World Supply and Major European Markets, UNCTAD/WTO.
6.2.5. The Swiss Regulation on
Organic Production
The Swiss Organic Farming Ordinance is stricter than the
EU Regulation on Organic Production in requiring conversion
of the whole farm to organic management (see Table 98
and, for more detail, Annex III). Its requirements relating to
the conversion process, on the other hand, are less strict
than the EU Regulation: in Switzerland there is no “year
zero”. As a result, conversion normally takes two years
rather than three as in the EU. 
(1) LU equiv.: Livestock unit equivalent (DGVE, Düngergrossvieheinheit)
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
250
Table 98: 
Organic Farming Regulations: Differences
between EU and Swiss Regulation
Criteria EU Regulation Swiss Organic Farming  
No. 2092/91 Ordinance (BV)
Whole-farm conversion to not obligatory mandatory; however, 
organic management vineyards and orchards are 
partly exempted
Step by step conversion Step by step conversion up to max. 5 years possible in 
the case of special crops
In-conversion label from 2nd year on from 1st year on
Documentation of no regulation required for direct payments 
ecological services
Compensatory habitat no regulation required for direct payments; 
areas 7% of land farmed 
Nutrient level max. 170 kg/ha max. 2.5 LU equiv.(1)/ha in  
(for animal husbandry) valleys; balanced nutrient 
input/output
Limits on copper use no regulation, permitted max. 4 kg/ha 
until 2002
Slug pellets and pyrethroid permitted in traps till 2002 Prohibited 
insecticides
Animal husbandry detailed regulation from detailed regulation from 
January 2001 January 2001 
Processing no irradiation no irradiation
Genetically modified prohibited Prohibited 
organisms and products 
derived from them
Packaging no regulation no regulation
6.2.6. The US National Organic
Program (NOP)
With its National Organic Program (NOP Final Rule), the
United States has finally regulated its organic market. The
regulation has taken effect October 21, 2002.  Since then all
produce marketed in the US as “organic”, “100% organic”
or “made with organic...” needs to be certified according
to the rule by a certification agency accredited by USDA,
the US Department of Agriculture.
Although the structure of the NOP differs quite consid-
erably from the structure and major focus of the EU
Regulation (EEC) N° 2092/91, the regulation covers
basically the same issues: Applicability (what has to be
certified), Organic Production and Handling, Labeling,
Certification requirements, Accreditation of certification
bodies, Administrative (National List of allowed and
Prohibited Substances).
Compared to the EU-Regulation, the final NOP rule
emphasizes certain aspects more than the EU-Regulation
e.g. It puts great emphasis on the organic production and
handling system plan, in which the operator himself
declares all his planned activity for the next year and
outlines in detail measures that will be taken to ensure
compliance with the Act. The plan is approved by the
certification agency and then is binding for the operator.
Certain major requirements of the EU-Regulation do not
apply, e.g. producing the same crop variety in organic and
conventional quality.  The list of allowed inputs, the
necessary conversion period for crop production, the animal
husbandry requirements and the labeling requirements
for processed products are defined differently. Some
important differences for organic operators are outlined in
chapter 6.7. 
6.2.7. The Japanese Agricultural
Standards for Organic Products
(JAS)
In line with a revision to the Law Concerning Standardization
and Proper Labeling of Agricultural and Forestry Products
(the JAS Law), the Japanese Ministry for Agriculture,
Forestry and Fishery (MAFF) has in 2000 established the
Japan Agricultural Standards (JAS) for organic agricultural
products and processed foods made from organic agricul-
tural products. Under this system, products that do not meet
the appropriate JAS requirements may neither bear the
Organic JAS mark nor be labeled as organic products in
Japan33. The Japanese Agricultural Standard of Organic
Agricultural Products34 and the Japanese Agricultural
Standard of Organic Agricultural Product Processed Food35
define the necessary requirements for products in order to
be labeled as organic. In addition there are several supple-
mentary regulations that define inspection procedures and
technical certification criteria for manufacturers, importers,
sub-dividers and production process management directors.
Products that are to be labeled as JAS organic in Japan
or to be used as ingredients in JAS certified organic food,
need to be JAS certified, which implies certification by a
JAS accredited certification agency.  At the time of print only
very few foreign certification bodies were accredited by
MAFF. However, years of diplomatic efforts and attempts
from certification bodies as well as government to obtain
mutual acceptance of standards and registered certification
agencies seem to show some result.  So far, all the National
Organic Program and all USDA accredited certifiers in the
US have been accredited by MAFF and European regula-
tion and accredited certifiers can be expected to be accepted
soon. The only option for organic operators that are not 
33 MAFF Update Number 353 March 31, 2000
34 Notification No. 59 of MAFF on Jan 20, 2000
35 Notification No. 60 of MAFF on Jan 20, 2000
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
251
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
certified by one of these accredited certifiers according to
JAS at present is re-certification by a Japanese certification
body. This is costly and requires a couple of additional
efforts from the operator in particular with regard to
written organic quality management procedures and a
manager trained specifically as JAS production and process
manager.
Some important differences of the JAS organic standard
compared to other standards are described in chapter 6.8.
6.2.8. Private Label Standards
For many years, large number private label standards have
existed. Some countries in Europe and elsewhere had
already formulated their own legislation on organic
production or private standards and labeling schemes
before the applicable organic baseline regulation came into
force, in some cases many years earlier. These quality
marks for example in Germany, Denmark, Austria or
Switzerland, are well trusted by the consumers and are one
of the reasons for the current boom in these market for
organic products in these countries36. Private organic
standards are continuously developed by producer organi-
zations. For farmers, the standards of the label they use for
marketing their products are most relevant. Private labels
allow regional identification and are therefore an important
tool of the organic movement of a country. IFOAM
therefore recommends that countries of the south, that do
not yet have a local market for organic products, also create
their own private organic label standards.
36 SIPPO Swiss Import Promotion & FibL research Institute of Organic
Agriculture, 2001, The Organic Market in Switzerland and the
European Union.
Some of these “private labels” have been developed
by governments (e.g. AB Label in France) but most
commonly by farmers associations (e.g. Naturland or
Bioland in Germany; Bio Suisse in Switzerland, KRAV
in Sweden or Soil Association in the UK). Some label
organizations have established associated independent
certification agencies with the same name (e.g. Soil Cert,
KRAV Kontrol), others have contracts with certification
agencies to conduct the inspection of the specific label
requirements on their behalf. Obviously all private labels
in Europe have incorporated the minimum requirements
of Regulation (EEC) N° 2092/91  and organic operators
certified according to a private label scheme are always
certified both to the applicable baseline regulation (e.g.
Regulation (EEC) N° 2092/91  in Europe) and the private
standard (e.g. KRAV). Some labels are only regulating
the last processing steps while others also include the
farm production. These latter standards are more
important for international operators since their operation
might need to be certified by a private label organization
already in the country of origin. E.g. roasted coffee to be
labeled with the NATURLAND quality mark need to be
originating from coffee producers that are themselves
NATURLAND certified.
Most private labels are of marketing importance in only
certain countries or areas. Only Demeter is known as a
private label/quality mark for bio-dynamic agriculture and
is trusted world-wide. 
The following table highlights some important
European private labels with their respective markets of
importance for international projects. 
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
252
Other private European labels without crop production
rules substantially exceeding the EU-Regulation in
producer-relevant aspects and therefore without direct
importance for international producers are e.g. bioga-
rantie (Belgium), EKO (Holland), Statskontrolleret
okologisk (Denmark), BIO-Austria-Kontrollzeichen
(Austria), KRAV (Sweden), Ökoprüfzeichen (Germany),
garanzia AIAB (Italy).
Most of the private label organizations mentioned are
IFOAM accredited, which can also be of certain marketing
importance.
The re-certification process for above named private
labels usually includes a re-evaluation of the inspection
and certif ication documents by the private standard
certif ication body, the issue of a private label certifica-
tion decision (sometimes with additional conditions to
the operator) and some kind of contractual obligation
concerning the use of the organic private label (e.g.
Naturland: membership and label licenses fee of producer
required; Bio Suisse: license contract with the Swiss
handler that uses the Bio Suisse logo).
6.2.9. Relationship to Fair Trade 
Smallholders and cooperatives producing cash crops have
always been vulnerable to falling world market prices. A
number of organizations worldwide try to reduce these
risks by ensuring that producers are rewarded fairly for
their products. The organizations guarantee the small
farmers and producer associations in the South a fair price
for their produce and act as intermediaries in marketing
the products, that then bear the label of the organization.
Fair trade organizations have separate programs for dif-
ferent crops, of which the labels for coffee and cocoa are
the best known. 
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
253
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
Table 99: 
Important European private labels with their respective markets
Label (main market) Introduction
Demeter (international) Demeter is a world-wide certification system for bio-dynamic agriculture, used to verify to consumers in over 60 countries where food or products have  
www.demeter.net been produced according to the Demeter Standards.  Demeter-International e. V. and if there are any member organizations in the producing country, 
certify projects/operations in countries according the International Demeter standards. Inspection and certification agencies as well as single inspectors 
need to be approved by Demeter International
Naturland (Germany, US, Europe) • In order to obtain Naturland certification and the right to use the popular Naturland label, operations need to become member of the farmer 
www.naturland.de association Naturland e.V. 
• Most important label for organic coffee on the European market
AB (Agriculture Biologique) • No requirements exceed the EU-regulation, except the standards for livestock production. All European organic goods imported into the EU with  
(France) a valid import authorization can be labeled as AB.
• Organic goods coming from non European countries, must be listed on the Annex (so called “Addenda I”) of the AB regulation, as either not being 
available or not cultivated within the EU Listed products include e.g. coffee, cacao, bananas, pineapples, tea, spices, etc.
• The product must be labeled by a French importer/packer
Soil Association (UK) - the Soil Association is the UK most important certification body and its label is widely recognized and very popular on the UK market 
www.soilassociation.org - The Soil Association is presently evaluating several international certifier to ensure equivalence with their certification. For such certifiers no 
re-certification processes are necessary 
- On the contrary the importer has to apply for Soil Association re-certification upon the basis of a detailed inspection report and related documents. 
Oversea operators can have their own direct contract with Soil Association to directly label products with the Soil Association label.
Bio Suisse (Switzerland) - Bio Suisse is the Swiss organic farming association and its label the “bud” is basically the only recognized organic label on the Swiss market,  
www.bio-suisse.ch/uploads/e_bibliothek_9-1.pdf although products can also be marketed as organic (without bud) if they comply with the Swiss Organic Farming Ordinance or the EU-Regulation 
on organic farming. 
- Application for Bio Suisse certification can only be submitted by the Swiss importer (license holder) on the basis of a detailed inspection report 
covering all aspects that are important for Bio Suisse certification (not all certification agency necessarily describe all aspects).
In Europe, the most frequently seen fair trade labels
are those of Max Havelaar, Transfair and World Shops.
Further information can be found on the website of
Labeling Organizations International (FLO), Max
Havelaar and Transfair. Fair trade labels also appear in
the United States and elsewhere, though to a lesser extent
than in Europe. 
Having a Fair Trade label does not necessarily mean,
however, that the products can also be sold as “organic”. In
order to be designated organic, the project must be subject
to accredited organic inspection procedures. 
Several private organic labeling and certification
schemes maintain close contacts with Max Havelaar or
Transfair, since some projects conform to the standards of
both organizations. The combination of “organic” and
“fair trade” labeling can enhance a product’s market
prospects and is used successfully with organic products
from developing countries, such as banana, coffee, cocoa,
tee, citrus and flowers. 
6.3. Certification Requirements 
EU-Regulation and other 
standards
The following certification requirements are based on
Regulation (EEC) N° 2092/91 since presently the European
market is still the major organic import market and the EU-
Regulation exceeds most other baseline regulations in some
regard. Differences or additional requirements of other reg-
ulations such as the USDA National Organic Program, the
Japanese JAS standards or important private organic labels
are outlined in specific chapters. However, the texts have been
written to address the main requirements of all organic
standards, as also defined by the IFOAM Basic Standards.
Pre-requirements for certification 
Inspection along the Chain of Custody
According to Regulation (EEC) N° 2092/91 all operators
that handle (produce, process, re-pack, import, export)
organic produce are subject to inspection and certification
by an approved certification body. Therefore all steps in the
organic chain of custody need to  be properly supervised
and inspected/certified:
< Farms: all units managed by the organic operator need
to be subject to inspection, thus also including 
conventional units managed by the same operator.
Only products originating from certified organic 
production units can be sold as organic.
< All processing activities (including simple processing
such as cleaning, drying, re-packing)
< Storage facilities, Cool warehousing 
< All trade activities: thus both exporters and importers.
Currently brokers (never own the goods) do not need
to be certified, the physical flow of goods is decisive.
The certification agency of the exporter is crucial 
for all import procedures into the EU and is in charge
of verifying that all previous production steps have
been duly inspected and certified by an approved 
certification agency
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
254
< All transport activities between organic units need 
to fulfill certain requirements as outlined in the 
organic regulation, and thus are implicitly verified
during the inspection of the related organic units 
of origin/destination.
< According to the last amendment of Annex III, of the
EU regulation those units involved in the production,
preparation and import of organic products who have
contracted out a part or a the total of the concerned
operations to third parties are also subject to inspec-
tion and certification.
Agreement with Certification Body 
All operators to be certified need to have signed an inspection
contract with an approved certification agency before any
organic activity. The contract can be either direct or else
involving a third party as the mandator of the inspection. In
this case this third party “owns” the certification and usually
organic exports will only be granted with the mandator’s
consent. This is also the case for subcontracting, i.e.  an cer-
tified operators entering into subcontracts with other operator
to carry out specific operations on their behalf, for instance
part of the manufacturing process. The certification of sub-
contractors may be carried out as part of the certification of
the main operators, who pay for the certification.
The contract or other declaration has to outline which
activities are covered by the inspection and has to include a
written commitment of the operator to adhere to the set
organic standards as well as to accept the enforcement of
sanctions in the event of infringements or irregularities. The
operator also has to agree to grant the inspection body and
competent authorities free access to his operation facilities
and all related documentation. He must provide the inspection
body or authority with any information deemed necessary for
the purpose of the inspection. The operator also has to agree
to notify the inspection body of any changes in his activities
as well as in the case that he suspects or considers that a prod-
uct which he has produced, prepared, dealt with or which has
been delivered from another operator is  not complying with
organic standards.
Usually, this contract or written declaration remains
valid until it is formally cancelled.
Inspection Visits
For the first inspection, the operator must draw up a full
description of the unit and his activity and needs to define
all practical measures to be taken in his operation to ensure
compliance with the applicable organic standard. Usually
the inspection body will support the operator by providing
detailed questionnaires and other documents of guidance in
order to fulfil this obligation.
The inspection body must make a physical inspection of
the production/preparation units or other premises at least
once a year. Moreover, the Inspection body is obliged to carry
out random visits, announced or not. Samples may be taken for
analysis of possible contamination and detection of non-
conforming production methods. An inspection report must
be drawn up after each visit, countersigned by the operator.
Documentation Requirements
Various types of documents (usually summarizing docu-
mentation as well as original receipts and financial records)
must be kept in the organic operation to enable the inspection
body to trace all suppliers and recipients of the organic
goods, the product flow as well as the nature, quantities and
use of all inputs.
The accounts must demonstrate the balance between the
input and the output.
More details on the documentary accounts that are
required on each organic production level (crop production,
livestock production, manufacturer, etc.) are outlined in the
related chapters below.
Separation of Organic Qualities
Operators throughout the whole chain of custody need to
ensure the separation of organic products. This implies that
organic products, i.e. organically grown products from
defined certified organic fields, are being kept strictly
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
255
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
separate from any conversion products or conventional (not
certified) products. Sufficient separation is achieved and
proven by all related measures such as appropriate labeling,
different storage rooms, separate processing times, etc.
Many explicit requirements of Regulation (EEC)
N° 2092/91 are actually measures deemed necessary to
ensure appropriate separation and in order to enable the
inspection body to control implementation processes
(labeling rules, different storage areas, detailed purchase
and sales documentation, detailed processing documen-
tation etc.)
Packaging and Labeling During Transport 
Operator need to ensure that organic products are transported
to other units (e.g. the processing unit) only in appropriate
packaging and containers:
< Containers/Boxes/Bags must be closed/sealed in such
manner that the content cannot be exchanged or
manipulated. This is, however, not necessary from a
farm (production unit) to an organic processor.
< Containers/boxes/bags need to be clearly labeled with
name and address of the operator (or owner of the
products), the product and indication of the organic
quality (organic or organic in conversion) and the
name or code number of the inspection body that is
certifying the sending operator. If appropriate, lot
numbers or other clear identification marks also need
to be indicated on the package.
< Instead of labeling the product containers/bags directly
the above stated information can also be presented on
accompanying documents, provided that the document
is undeniably linked to the organic product lot.
Storage
For the storage of organic goods, specific measures are nec-
essary to ensure identification of the organic lots and to avoid
any mixing with or contamination by conventional products,
e.g. by allocating specifically labeled areas in warehouses.
Any contamination (e.g. by fumigation) must be avoided. 
There has to be at least one physical inventory of the
warehouse storage per year.
Requirements for Inspection Bodies
Within the European Union, certification bodies are
accredited for activities in specific countries of activities
only, i.e. for each member state there is a list of approved
certification bodies that are entitled to perform inspections
and certif ication according to the Regulation (ECC)
N° 2092/91.
Operators outside the European Union must only show
that their organic produce are produced and certified
according to rules equivalent to those of the EU. The EU-
Regulation thus includes the additional requirement that
certification bodies performing inspections according to
the standard in countries outside the regulation must sat-
isfy the requirements laid down by EN45011 (equals the
international standard IS 65). EU member countries have
agreed on common guidelines to determine this con-
formity either by accreditation by an official accreditation
service or by the competent authority in the country of
origin or by the competent authority in the country of
import. So far it is not clear whether IFOAM accreditation
alone (without EN45011) is acceptable as evidence of
this conformity, but it can be expected to be so in thevery
near future.
For international operators looking for certification
bodies to certify their production for export according
to organic standards, it is important to ensure that their
certif ication body is either EN45011 accredited by
an approved/official accreditation body or directly accept-
ed by the authority of import of the country of destination
(one inspection body may be accepted in one member state
of the EU and not accepted in another). Usually, the
inspection agency will provide confirmation or proof of
their accreditation when submitting all relevant information
to the operator.
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
256
There are generally four types of certification bodies
operating in exporting countries37:
a) Local Certification Bodies: If the exporting country
is on the Art. 11 list (i.e. approved as a “third country”,
see chapter on EU-regulation) a certification body
appearing in this Art. 11 list of Regulation (EEC) 
N° 2092/91 should be chosen. Also in some other
countries (most exporting countries), local inspection
bodies are operating and offering organic certification.
In order to qualify as certification bodies according to
Regulation (EEC) N° 2092/91, these local inspection
bodies need to be either EN45011 accredited for 
certification according to the Regulation, or else
directly recognized by the authority of import in the
required country of import. 
b) Certification by a Local Branch of an International
Certification Body:
An international certification body, e.g. with its 
head office in Europe or the US may establish branch
offices elsewhere. These local branch offices are in
charge of inspection and all everyday contact with 
the clients. The final certification will usually tbe
granted by the head office of the certification body,
i.e. the operator will obtain e.g. a “European” 
certificate which may offer the best guarantee of easy
access to the destined country of import.
c) Certification by International Bodies
An operator may choose to be certified by an 
international certification body. International 
certification is likely to be more expensive than local
certification, but it may be the only solution in the
short term. The certification body does not need to be
European in order to enter the European market, but
they need to be accredited by certification 
programs that fulfill the requirements of Regulation
(EEC) N° 2092/91, or the requirements for other 
markets of import. 
d) Partnership between Local and International
Bodies
This partnership between international and local 
certification bodies can take various forms, but usually
local bodies carry out the bulk of the activities leading
to certification, while the international certifier 
periodically evaluated the implementation of 
certification procedures and sometimes issues the 
certificate38.
37 International Trade Center (ITC), 1999, Organic Food and Beverages:
World Supply and Major European Markets, UNCTAD/WTO.
38 International Trade Center (ITC), 1999, Organic Food and Beverages:
World Supply and Major European Markets, UNCTAD/WTO.
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
257
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
6.4. Requirements for Crop
Production
Conversion Period
All organic standards require a certain time between the
beginning of organic cultivation and the time that the crop
can be harvested as organic. This time is usually referred to
as the conversion period. 
The required conversion period according to Regulation
(EEC) N° 2092/91 is:
< Annual Crops: 24 months prior to sowing, i.e. all
annual crops (e.g. beans, cereals, salad) that are to be
sold as organic must be grown organically on land that
has been cultivated organically according to the
Regulation (EEC) N° 2092/91 for at least 24 months
before it has been sowed out.
If an annual crops has a vegetation period of more
than 12 months after sowing, then basically the rules
for perennial crops will apply.
Example: beans are sowed in June and harvested in
September; the beginning of conversion was set to
March 2000, then the first organic harvest of beans
can be in September 2002. If the beginning of 
conversion was August 2000, then the first organic
harvest would be in September 2003.
< Perennial Crops: 36 months prior to harvest, i.e. 
all perennial crops (e.g. coffee, tea, apples, cocoa, etc.)
that are to be sold as organic, need to be cultivated
organically for at least 3 years before harvest.
Example: coffee is harvested in December, beginning
of conversion was set to September 2000; first harvest
as organic coffee is harvest December 2003.
< Grassland as pasture for organic livestock: 2 years
before harvest/use as organic feedstuff
< Marketing during the Conversion Period: All products
that are produced according to the organic standards
for at least 12 months can be sold as “organic in 
conversion” or “organic in transition”. All crops 
produced in the first year of conversion (sometimes
called “zero-year”) cannot be marketed with any 
reference to organic production methods, i.e. although
the production methods are already organic, the 
product must be marketed as conventional.
Example: a tea farm is converting to organic farming;
the begin of conversion has been set to 3/2000 (last
application of prohibited input). All tea harvested until
2/01 must be marketed as conventional, tea harvested
between 3/01 and 2/03 could be marketed as organic
in conversion, tea harvested from 3/2003 onwards may
be sold as organic tea.
The EU-Regulation determines the beginning of the
conversion process for a given parcel of land not merely the
time of last input of prohibited inputs, but instead a defi-
nition of the main production principles (use only of fer-
tilizers and pest control measures that are permitted in the
regulation; ensuring long term soil fertility, natural control
of pests and diseases, no GMO’s) that must have been fully
met during the conversion period. 
The new Annex I also defines the beginning of the
conversion process as being the date that the operator
applied for certification with the inspection body/notifies
his activities to the inspection body. However, under cer-
tain circumstances the inspection body can recognize
previous land use retrospectively as part of the conver-
sion period. The beginning of conversion process can
therefore only be set by the certification body in the
course of the first certification and with due considera-
tion of all supporting documentation provided by
the operator, particularly with regard to the previous
land use.
The conversion period also remains a very critical issue
with regard to acceptance in the country of import. Several
countries are considering drafting import regulations that
exceed Regulation (EEC) N° 2092/91 in this particular
issue. It appears at the moment that in the best case, a one
year certified conversion period will still be required.
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
258
Sustainable Management
Organic standards require a proactive, long-term program of
ecological management. This includes implementation of:
< Soil building strategies: appropriate crop rotation with
e.g. leguminous plants for annual crops or appropriate
inter-cropping for perennials to ensure long-term soil
fertility; appropriate fertilization measures designed 
to close the internal production cycles as much as 
possible (i.e. mainly operating the farms own sources
of fertilization)
< Nature conservation measures, such as increasing 
bio diversity by leaving e.g. ecological buffer zones,
nature reserves, hedges, biotopes, etc. this also
includes planting e.g. trees on the organic farm or 
promoting rare local species, no de-forestation.
< Prevention of soil erosion, e.g. by means of bundles 
or contour planning, soil covering, weeding instead of
hoeing weeds, etc.
Fertilization
Long-term soil fertility is to be ensured by means of:
< Cultivation of leguminous and green manure plants as
intercrops or parts of the crop rotation scheme.
< Use of organic livestock manure from the own 
operation (if feasible), up to 170 kg Nitrogen/ha/yr.
< Use of other organic material, preferably after composting
into a well nutrient-balanced compost mixture.
Only in the case that measures can not ensure soil fer-
tility and sufficient nutrient input, fertilizers as listed in
Annex II, Part A of Regulation (EEC) N° 2092/91 may be
used. For many of the fertilizers, the inspection body has to
approve the need and therefore applications for the use of
this input; thus these inputs need to be submitted to the
inspection body well before planned use. Use may be restricted
to certain maximum quantities and needs to be carefully
documented in the farm documentation.
If purchasing any ready-made “organic fertilizers” for
organic production, operators need to ensure that the
fertilizers are actually certified as being appropriate for
use in certified organic farming according to the applicable
standard. Since certification standards for “permitted”
off-farm inputs often differ considerably, operators should
always ensure compliance before use of the input by
submitting a request to their inspection body.
Plant Protection
The choice of appropriate varieties, appropriate crop rotation
programs, mechanical soil cultivation, protection of natural
enemies of pests and flame weeding form the bases for
organic plant protection. In case of immediate threat to the
crop, plant protection products as listed in Annex II, Part B
of Regulation (EEC) N° 2092/91 may be used.
Again, the need for the use of most of this products must
be acknowledged by the inspection body and therefore
many inspection bodies require an application process for
the use of all off-farm plant protection inputs.
If purchasing any ready-made products for organic
plant protection, operators need to ensure that the products
are actually certified as being appropriate for use in certified
organic farming according to the applicable standard. Since
certification standards for “permitted” off-farm inputs
often differ considerably, operators should always ensure
compliance before use of the input by submitting a request
to their inspection body.
The use of all plant protection agents needs to be
documented in great detail (incl. quantities) and usually
per each plot (e.g. in so-called plot application registers).
It is also the operator’s responsibility to prevent any
contamination by prohibited substances from conventional
neighbors or his own conventional operation unit. This can
be achieved by means of e.g. buffer zones (without
cropping), no-harvest cropping zones, ditches, hedges
or other wind breaks, no-spraying agreement with
neighbors, etc.
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
259
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
Seeds and Seedlings
For organic production only organically produced (=certified)
seeds and seedlings may be used. If certified organic
seedlings for the required variety are not available com-
mercially, and this can be proven to the inspection agency,
then conventional (not certified) seeds may be used when
not treated with any prohibited agent. If the required seeds
can be proven unavailable even in untreated conventional
quality, then treated seeds may be used for a clearly restricted
transition period; great efforts need to be taken to ensure
organic seed supply in future. The use of conventional
seeds in organic cultivation is authorized only until end
of 2003.
The used seeds or seedlings must not be genetically
modified.
Management of Farms with an Organic and a
Conventional Unit
A unit that grows organic produce must be clearly separate
from those that produce conventional products. “Unit” is
described at “land parcels and production and storage 
locations which are clearly separate from those of any other
unit not producing in accordance with the organic standard”. 
The EU-Regulation prescribes that if the organic oper-
ator also runs conventional units in the same areas, these
must also be inspected in the course of the inspection of the
organic unit, but obviously only to a limited extent. The
production of both conventional and organic crops within
one operation is often referred to as split operation.
Split operation is permitted under Regulation (EEC)
N° 2092/91, but it is prohibited under many private label
schemes. Split organic operations need to fulfill a couple of
additional requirements and inspection may need to focus
in particular on appropriate separation of the organic
(organic and conversion fields) and the conventional unit.
Split operations need to ensure the following additional
aspects in particular:
< The organic (organic and conversion fields under organ-
ic management) and the conventional unit must be clearly
defined, separate units, i.e. they are usually clearly
defined fields. All crops grown on the conventional
fields are “conventional products” and may not be mixed
at any time with the products grown on the organic unit.
The definition of clearly separate organic and conventional
units is of crucial importance when rotating annual crops.
In this case, it must be ensured that organic crops only rotate
on the organic fields and never to the conventional fields
(unless it is planned to convert these fields also to organ-
ic fields and the conversion periods are respected)
< The inputs used in the conventional unit may not be stored
at the same place as inputs used in the organic unit, even 
if inputs in stock happen to be allowed (e.g. lime used in
both units needs to be stored in two different places).
< All measures need to be taken to prevent contamination
of the organic crops by the conventional activities.
Attention should therefore be paid e.g. to minimize 
the use of the same farming devices such as pesticide
application devices, tractors, etc.
< The farm documentation of both units has to meet 
the basic standards for organic certification, i.e. all
inputs used as well as harvest figures need to be 
carefully documented.
< The same varieties may not be produced in the organic
and the conventional unit, unless certain additional
requirements are fulfilled (see below). Production of 
a certain crop in both organic and conventional quality
is often referred to as “Parallel Production”.
Parallel production, i.e. production of the same or an in
differentiable crop variety in both organic and conventional
quality by the same operator is prohibited for all annual
crops. Parallel production of perennial crops can be accepted
if all of the following requirements are being met:
< The operation has a conversion plan where the last plot
of the operation is converted to organic farming within a
maximum of 5 years. The conversion plan has to be
approved by the certification body.
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
260
< Appropriate separation measures are taken and docu-
mented to ensure permanent separation of the organic
and the conventional products. Such separation meas-
ures usually need to be taken very seriously in order to
really ensure separation in every day routines on a farm
(e.g. often harvest is done by untrained workers who
e.g. cannot acknowledge any difference between the
organic and the conventional apples on two neighboring
plots).
< The inspection body is notified of each harvest at least 48
hours in advance and is furthermore informed immediately
after harvest regarding the exact harvest quantities together
with a confirmation that separation has been guaranteed.
Management of Organic Farms with Organic and
Conversion Areas
The main requirement for organic operations in both organic and
conversion fields requires taking strict measures to ensure that
organic and conventional products are not mixed at any time.
If the same crop is produced in both organic and 
conventional quality, it is also sometimes called “parallel pro-
duction”, but since this is not the situation as outlined above
and as defined in Par. 3 of Annex III, Part A1 it is referred to
as “production of different organic qualities” in this handbook.
The production of the same crop in conversion and organic
quality is not restricted per se, however the inspection may
decide that, for instance, the separation cannot be realistically
guaranteed and therefore de-classify the whole harvest (not
areas) of the crop concerned to conversion (esp. for annual
crops). Therefore operators are advised to plant different
crops when converting additional fields to organic farming.
Farm Documentation
The following records should be kept in a form that is
suitable for the concerned operation:
< Records of purchased inputs such as fertilizer, plant pro-
tection agents, seeds, etc. The necessary records include
both original receipts and often also a comprehensive
purchase summary in order to facilitate the inspection
< Farm maps showing the whole operation (organic and
conventional unit) with dates and some indication on
important landmarks, plot numbers as well as zones
with risk of drift.
< Field history records for all new fields, incl. any 
statements from former owners etc.
< Cultivation activity records, either as e.g. plot registers or
farm diaries. In particular, any application of fertilizers
and pest control agents needs to be recorded in details.
< Specification of used inputs or suppliers, for instance
certification of seed supplier, certification of used 
off-farm organic fertilizer, specification of the used
organic pest protection agent, etc.
< Harvest records (e.g. crop harvested, date , field #,
quantity)
< Storage records (bin registers, warehouse in-out)
< Transportation records of the organic products: either
from field to farm or to the next unit (e.g. processing unit)
< Sales records of the organic products (e.g. to the 
processing unit)
Post-harvest Processing
All on farm post-harvest processing (e.g. threshing of wheat,
cleaning of fruits, drying of spices, de-pulping of coffee berries,
etc.) needs to comply with basically the same requirements as
other organic processing units, except the requirements for
documentation of the incoming goods. The requirements
for organic processing are outlined in more detail below.
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
261
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
6.5. Requirements for Livestock
Production
For certification of livestock the EU-Regulation defines
very detailed requirements, which include various aspects
such a conversion periods, fodder, housing, medication,
animal welfare. These requirements are only summarized
very briefly here as this handbook does not focus on certi-
fied livestock production.
The main requirements for organic husbandry are,
however, also important for operators striving to rear their
farm animals according to organic standards to the extent
possible, even if not certif ied. In exporting countries,
animal husbandry is usually considered as “conventional
unit”, from which input “manure” is transferred to the
organic unit (=organic farm). However, obviously the
ultimate aim is to also convert the animal husbandry fully
to organic management.
< Pastures and Free Ranging Area must also be under
organic management and certified.
< Fodder: Animals are to be fed with organic feedstuff, 
if feasible for the own farm: all feedstuff and additives
as defined in Annex II, C are also permitted. 
In addition to organic fodder, conversion fodder may
be used up to 30% (or 60% if from the own farm),
depending on the animal species. Maximum 10% of
the fodder may be conventional
< Certain Conversion Periods defined for each species,
i.e. the time the animal must be under organic 
management before it or its products may be marketed
as organic. E.g. 13 Months (or 3/4 of their live) for
cattle for beef production, 3 months for milk
producing animals.
< Animal Health needs to be ensured by appropriate
varieties, high quality fodder, appropriate stock 
densities etc. Preventive use of allopathic medication,
antibiotics, growth-increasing hormones etc. is 
prohibited. In case of acute disease phytotherapeutic
and homeopathic medication may be given, and if not
curable otherwise, allopathic medication applied up 
to 3 times a year. For a period after the application, 
the animals or their products may not be marketed as
organic. All purchases and gestation of animals needs
to be duly documented, including all medication.
< Housing needs to meet the natural requirements of 
the animals. Stables have to fulfil certain requirements
(floors, light, sufficient room, maximum stock 
densities). Free roaming animals can only graze on
well defined organic areas and need to have access to
protective shelter (maximal densities defined). 
For each species, certain detailed requirements are
defined.
< Animal welfare: tail cutting and removal of horns 
for cattle may not be performed systematically.
Proliferation has to be natural; stress for animals
before slaughtering is to be minimized.
< All activities, including purchase of new animals, 
fodder purchase, medication, gestation details, etc.
need to be documented in written accounts and 
supported by the related receipts.
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
262
6.6. Requirements for Processors
and Traders
Incoming Goods
When receiving organic goods the processor or trader
needs to verify that the incoming containers are labeled
according to the requirements and sealed, ensuring that
suff icient proof of the organic certif ication of the
received goods is available, e.g. by demanding national
transaction certif icates from products purchased from
other units that are certified by other certification bodies.
Prohibited Methods
Products that are to be labeled as organic products must
have fulfilled the organic standard throughout the whole
custody chain. They may not contain genetically modified
organisms or be radiated.
As a general rule, the EU-Regulation prohibits every
ingredient/input that is not explicitly allowed, i.e. all
inputs/auxiliaries/additives that are not listed in Annex VI
in the related tables may NOT be used in organic products,
except if exceptional permission has been granted by
authority in the country of import.
Ingredients and Auxiliaries
Each organic product must be clearly defined with regard to
its composition (recipe) as well as origin, type and quantity
of all ingredients, additives and auxiliaries. All recipes for
organic products should usually be verified and approved
by the inspection body prior to processing.
For processed goods to be labeled as “organic”  the fol-
lowing are main requirements:
< Only such auxiliaries and additives as listed in Annex
VI, Part A&B may be used. For most such auxiliaries
declarations that they are not genetically modified will
be required from the supplier.
< 95% of all ingredients or agricultural origin need to 
be certified organic. The remaining 5% may be of 
conventional quality, but all of these conventional
ingredients must be listed in Annex VI, Part C, 
otherwise they must be organic. The same ingredient
may not be used both in organic and conventional
quality.
For products that are to be labeled as “X% of the agricultural
ingredients were produced in accordance with the rules of
organic production” the following requirement applies:
< Only such auxiliaries and additives as listed in Annex
VI, Part A&B may be used.
< 70% of all ingredients or agricultural origin need to 
be certified organic. The remaining 30% may be of
conventional quality, but all of these conventional
ingredients must be listed in Annex VI, Part C.
Products containing less than 70% organic ingredients
may not refer to the organic quality of any ingredients on
their label.
Conversion products may not be used in multi-ingredient
products in the EU, i.e. they can only be marketed as mono-
products (e.g. fresh fruits, frozen vegetables, dried fruits,
100% fruit juice), but not e.g. in fruit jams, banana chips
(oil and sugar added).
Separation and Preventing Contamination during
Processing and/or Storage
If the organic manufacturer also processes, re-packs or
stores conventional goods, then all necessary measures
have to be taken to identify the lots and to prevent them
from commingling with conventional products.
< The processing dates for organic products are to be
documented and announced to the inspection body in
advance, and if requested (for rare processing events)
< The processing line (machines) must be cleaned 
thoroughly before processing organic products. 
If thorough cleaning is not possible, the first
batches of organic processed products cannot be
sold as organic 
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
263
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
< In order to prevent contamination and accidental mixing
of qualities, organic processing should be organized in
blocks, e.g. every day, in the morning, organic process-
ing, in the afternoon, conventional processing
< During all internal intermediate stages and storage,
organic products also need to be labeled accordingly 
in order to prevent any commingling.
< Clear storage areas are needed for the organic goods
(including intermediary stages).
< Workers need to be aware of the specific requirements
for organic processing and need to be trained accordingly.
The less experienced the workers are in organic processing
and separation, the easier and clearer all separation
measures need to be, e.g. use of differently colored boxes
for organic, conversion and conventional products.
< Fumigation or irradiation of the produce is not allowed
< Facility pest management is not restricted per se, but
may not contaminate the organic produce.
Documentation
< The processing/trader documentation needs to enable
the inspection body to verify the origin, nature and
quantity of all incoming goods, the nature quantity and
customer of all products leaving the operation. 
< List of suppliers, list of customers, list of all incoming
ingredients and sales statistics; original purchase
invoices for all ingredients, additives, auxiliaries used,
including their specification.
< Furthermore other information such as origin, type
and quantities of all ingredients, additives or 
auxiliaries, as well as the composition of the final 
products needs to be available 
< Recipes for each product; processing dairies also
indicating the ingredients/additives used in a specific
processing step
< Assortment list of all products produced in the 
operation (including conventional products) with their
code numbers
< For every export shipment the exporter needs to apply
for the issue of a “certificate of inspection” (also
called import certificate or transaction certificate) to
his certification body. These certificates of inspection
will be described in more detail in the chapter “import
procedures”. The certificates will usually be sent
directly to the importer, who needs them as a proof
that the imported lot is actually certified organic.
Export Labeling
The export labels for semi-processed goods need to fulfill
basically the same requirements as transport between
certified operators (e.g. processor and organic exporter):
Bags/containers need to be closed so that their content
cannot be exchanged, and need to be labeled with the
name/address of the last processor/packer, the organic
quality (e.g. “organic”), the name or control number of the
certification agency that has certified the last processing or
packaging step.
However, export labels for finally processed products,
i.e. for products that are labeled with the final consumer
label need to fulfill more detailed and complicated
requirements, in particular in the case of multi ingredient
products (several agricultural ingredients and/or additives/
auxiliaries). In this case the recipe has to be checked in
order to determine the correct labeling.
Consumer labels for conversion products may only
refer to consumer labels for organic production methods
by indicating the following sentence (in exact wording):
“product under conversion to organic farming”. Indications
such as for instance “organic in conversion apples” are not
permitted.
Normally export labels, and in particular if end con-
sumer labels, will be verified by the inspection body, so if
changes are made it might be necessary to check with the
inspection body beforehand.
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
264
6.7. Additional and Differing
Requirements for the US
Market
The USDA National Organic Program (NOP) Final Rule
came into force on 21st October 2002. This Act by the US
Department of Agriculture (USDA) is the baseline certifi-
cation standard according to which all products to label as
organic (different labeling expressions defined, see below)
need to be certified, this includes all imported organic
products.
Therefore all products that are sold to the US as organic
(i.e. for sales as organic) need to be certified according to
this act by a certification body that is accredited by USDA.
The Act can be downloaded from the USDA NOP Website:
http://www.ams.usda.gov/nop/ 
Since most organic operators world-wide will most
probably export to both the European and the US market,
the following texts highlight the principal differences
between the NOP and the EU-regulation with specific
emphasis on all those aspects where the US Act exceeds the
requirements of regulation (EEC) N° 2092/91 and where
there are different requirements for livestock production. 
Applicability  and  Organic Production Handling
System Plan 
< Certain Operations are exempt from certification and
submission of an organic system plan, e.g. any 
production / handling operation with organic sales
total less than 5’000 USD or traders that only trade
readily packed and labeled goods.
< Each organic operator must develop an organic 
production or handling system plan that is agreed 
to by the certification agent. The plan must include:
description of practices to be performed and 
maintained, list of substances used as production or
handling inputs, description of monitoring practices 
to verify that the plan is effectively implemented, 
a description of the record keeping system and all 
separation measures. 
The plan is then binding for the operator. Some 
agencies will provide specific questionnaires or 
other supporting documents to support the operator 
in preparing the organic production and handling 
system plan 
Additional Record Keeping Requirements
< All operator records must be kept available for at least
5 years.
Conversion Period
< Conversion period is 3 years before harvest for all
crops (also annual crops), beginning with the date of
the last non permissible application.
Fertilization:
< raw manure must be composted unless (a) on crops not
for human consumption or (b) incorporated in the soil
120 days before harvest (if edible plant part in contact
with soil) or for 90 days before harvest (otherwise)
< Composted plant  and  animal materials must be
produced according to the following or equivalent 
efficient processes: initial C:N ratio between 25:1 and
40:1; maintained at 55-77°C for 3 days (in-vessel/
aerated system) or for 15 days (windrow composting
system, materials turned at least 5 times) or 
equivalently efficient composting methods.;
Uncomposted plant material may be used.
< Sewage sludge may not be used under any 
circumstances (not allowed in EU anyway) 
< All other inputs listed in Annex II, Part A may also be
used according to NOP National List
Plant Protection  and  Weed Management, Seeds
< A few plant protection agents that are allowed 
according to EU are not allowed in the US (see
National List). Generally, all non-synthetic substances
are allowed, except if explicitly prohibited.
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
265
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
< Seeds treated with prohibited substances may not be
used (also if not commercially available otherwise)
< The use of inputs that are used as disinfectants and
sanitizers in the production/ (e.g. in irrigation 
system) is also restricted
< Buffer zones to conventional fields are required 
(cannot be replaced by other protection measures)
Facility Pest Management:
< in an organic facility pests must be prevented by 
physical factors. If necessary pests can be controlled
by traps, lures repellents with substances listed in the
National List.
< under certain conditions, substances not listed may
also be applied; but great care has to be taken 
(and documented) that the organic products are not
contaminated. 
Label Categories:
< 100% organic: 100% of all ingredients must be
organic, i.e. also all  auxiliaries/additives (even if
allowed) must also be certified organic substances
(e.g. only organically produced Lecithine may be
used) Allowed: except water  and  salt. 
< organic: 95 % of all ingredients must by (NOP-)
organic, the other 5% must be commercially 
unavailable; certain restrictions for the conventional
ingredients; all auxiliaries/processing aids listed in
National list.
< “made with organic (specified ingredients or food
groups)”: only 70% of the ingredients must be NOP
certified organic. The  30 % conventional ingredients
must not be “commercially unavailable”, certain
restrictions for the conventional produce.
< Products with less than 70% organic ingredients:
this type of product cannot be marketed as organic
product in the EU!.
Note: the percentage is found by calculating the share of
certified organic product of the TOTAL weight/volume of
the finished product, while according to the EU regulation
the percentage is calculated as the percentage of organic
agricultural ingredients of the total weight/volume of agri-
cultural ingredients.
Contamination:
< Explicit requirements include that packaging material
must be clean and must not pose any risk of contami-
nation, and the material must not be treated with
unpermitted substances
< In installations that get in contact with soil or live-
stock, no lumber treated with Arsenic may be used
< When residue testing detects prohibited substances at
levels that are greater than 5 percent of the
Environmental Protection Agency’s tolerance for the
specific residue detected or unavoidable residual 
environmental contamination, the agricultural product
must not be sold, labeled, or represented as organically
produced.  
USDA NATIONAL LIST 
(only where stricter than Annex II of Regulation
(EEC) N° 2092/91), for more details see original
NOP National List (Subpart G of the Act)
Disinfectants and sanitizers used in organic
crop production (e.g. in irrigation system)
Allowed NOP, not regulated EU: Alcohols, Ethanol,
Isopropanol, Chlorine materials (residue chlorine
levels lower than max. drinking water limit),
Calcium hypochlorite, Chlorine dioxide, Sodium
hypochlorite, hydrogen peroxide, soap-based
algicides.
Insecticides  and  Rodenticides
Allowed in EU but not allowed in NOP: Gelatin
(insecticide), hydrolyzed proteins (sometimes not
considered plant protection product) , tobacco
dust (no longer after 3/02) ; pyrethroids in traps
Slug or snail bait
Allowed in EU but not allowed in NOP: Metaldehyd
(NOP: None allowed! )
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
266
Plant disease control
Allowed in EU but not in NOP: Lecithin (fungi-
cide), potassium permanganat, 
Plant or Soil Amendments, Fertilizers
Allowed in EU but not in NOP: ash from manure
burning; use of trace elements is restricted to certain
chemical forms (sulfonates, carbonates, oxides and
silicate forms only and may not be used as defoliant,
herbicide or desiccant); .raw manure restricted with
well defined compost requirements
Floating Agents in Post harvest handling
Allowed EU, but more restricted NOP: Aquatic plant
extracts (strict restrictions regarding extraction
methods)
Processing ingredients/ Auxiliaries
allowed by EU but prohibited NOP: activated carbon,
agar, argon, carrageenan, casein, egg white albumen,
ethanol solvent, gelatin, karaga gum, tragacanth
gum, hazelnut shells, isinglass, malic acid, potassium
alginate, rice meal, sodium tartrate, talc, and tartaric
acid (l(+)-).  
6.8. Additional and Differing
Requirements for the
Japanese Market
The Japanese Agricultural Standard of Organic Agriculture
defines the organic standard requirements that all products
labeled in Japan as organic need to fulfill and need to be
certified. Certifiers need to be accredited in order to be able
to certify according to the JAS standards, but many
Japanese certifiers offer re-certification according to JAS,
verifying as such that the certified organic operator also
fulfils the specific JAS requirements.
In addition to the mere fulfillment of the organic produc-
tion standards for agricultural products (Notification 59 of
MAFF) and for organic processed food (notification 60), the
JAS regulations request, in their technical criteria of organic
operators (Notification No. 819 ), that operators formulate
their own internal regulation and procedures in a very
detailed manner (almost equivalent to an ISO 9000 certifica-
tion). Organic operators need to have internal regulation for
production process management, grading regulations and
must appoint an organic process manager and grading man-
ager:
Internal Regulation for Production Process
Management:
All procedures to carry out quality management must be
described in a practical and systematic way. The required
content of the regulation is summarized in II-2 of No. 819.
The internal regulation (description of internal procedures)
has to cover all therein listed aspects39:
< Annual production plan 
< Cultivation plan (fertilization, seeds, pest control, etc.)
< Maintenance, cleaning and washing of machinery,
equipment and tools
< Lot control from harvest to shipment
39 JONA: The Management System required by the technical criteria;
documentation for JONA applicants, Feb. 2002. 
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
267
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
< On-farm processing
< Record keeping (harvest, shipments, losses)
< Reporting to the certification body and obligation to undergo
annual inspection and auditing by a certification body.
< Check and revision of the internal regulations (need to
be reviewed periodically)
< Claim / Complaints policy and procedures
< Education and training of staff and workers
Grading Regulations for Organic Products
This requirement is described in No. 819 IV: all procedures
to inspect the production process of organic agriculture and
to judge whether the products are compliant with organic
JAS and if so, approve labeling JAS organic before shipping.
The organic grading manager (different from the quality
control manager, basically an internal inspector to re-evaluate
all organic quality management) 
< evaluate the conformity of the operation with internal
regulations and the JAS standard by checking the
operation records, 
< must approve the grading (labeling) of the products as
organic and the use of the JAS label, 
< supervise storage and shipment of the organic goods, 
< deal with unapproved products 
< and supervise/co-ordinate the external inspection by
the accredited certification body.
Production Process Management Staff 
Production process management staffs need to be appointed
to be in charge of all organic production, including sub-
contracted operations. All quality management staff needs
to fulfill the following requirements:
< University degree in a subject related to agricultural
production or degree from profession school with at
least 1 year practical experience in agricultural 
production or guidance, investigation, etc. Or high
school or secondary education school level with practical
experience in agricultural production and guidance 
for more than 2 years OR experience in agricultural
production or guidance for more than 3 years
For small operations it may be sufficient to have one
quality control manager who has completed the curriculum
concerning management and the grasp of the production
process of the organic agricultural products. If there are
several production process management staff, then a
production process management director shall be elected
from them. 
The “agricultural production process management
director” is according to JAS understanding basically the
organic operator or its legal representative (farmers, a
farmers co-operatives or managers of such operations)
Organic Production Rules
The organic production rules as defined in the JAS
Regulation No. 59 can be summarized as follows (with
regard to differences to Regulation (EEC) N° 2092/91):
< Production Units: clear separation of organic and 
conventional fields required (if applicable buffer zones
etc. must be installed), but parallel production is not
prohibited
< Conversion Period: same as in Regulation (EEC) 
N° 2092/91 (36 months for perennial crops, 24 months
before sowing for annual crops), but during the 
conversion period ALL organic production standards
(including organic seeds, etc.) must have been 
fulfilled. On newly developed land or fields that have
not been used for cultivation, prohibited substance
must not have been used at least 2 years and the 
full set of criteria must have been fulfilled for at least
one year.
From 12 months after begin of conversion onwards
products may be sold as organic in conversion.
< Fertilization: only certain by-products of agricultural
origin permitted (rape seed cake, rice bran oil cake,
soybean powder and cake) but all composts derived
from “agricultural products and their derivates” may
be used; peat may be used without restrictions; no
blood meal, horn meal, meat meal, wool, fur, hairs; 
no magnesium carbonate, BUT there is a general 
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
268
provision that allows all nutrition providing fertilizers
that are a “natural substance” or those derived from a
natural
< Seeds and Seedlings: The seed stock used must 
comply with the organic production rules, but it is not
explicitly stated that it needs to be certified.
Conventional seeds may be used if organic ones are
“hard to obtain by ordinary means”. Seeds must not be
genetically modified
< Pest and Disease Control: not permitted compared
with EU-Regulation: neem products (neem itself
allowed, commercial neem products need to be 
authorized by MAFF)), gelatine, Lecitin, tobacco
extract; quassia extract, all copper formulation 
except copper sulfate and copper wettable powder,
metaldehyd, diammonium phosphate, soft soap, 
mineral oils (only vegetable oil and paraffin for
spreaders permitted), potassium permanganate
< Pest Control during Processing, Cleaning, Storage
Packaging and other processes is explicitly regulated:
only products listed in the regulation may be used (all
allowed plant protection agents with clearly defined
processing auxiliaries only)
Organic Processing Rules (Notification No. 60)
< Ingredients: conventional ingredients may be used up
to 5% of total weight except salt and water (not 
irradiated and not GMO, and not the same ones as in
organic quality. For labeling as ”JAS organic,” not
more than 5% livestock and marine products may be 
in the product since these cannot be certified under
JAS.  Such products can however be labeled as “made
with organic agricultural ingredients”
< Food Additives: shall be within necessary minimum
for manufacturing; only as listed in regulation (no 
difference between processing aid and ingredients of
non-agricultural origin)
not permitted JAS(Compared to Regulation (EEC) 
N° 2092/91): tocopherol-rich extract, Calcium citrate,
Potassium alginate
< Labeling: several Japanese wordings of the word
organic are given; labeling as “organic” is also 
permissible. Organic in conversion products and all
processed products containing conversion products are
to be labeled with “under the conversion period” in
front or in the rear of the word/signs for organic.
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
269
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
6.9. Additional and Differing
Requirements Private
Standards
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
270
Table 100: 
General information on these private labels is described in the chapter “Private Labels”
Label (main market) Most Important Additional Requirements (for international operators, without livestock certification) 
Demeter (international) • According to the principles of bio-dynamic agriculture the entire enterprise, including all the fields and animal husbandry must be converted. 
www.demeter.net • cattle or other ruminants must be kept on agricultural farms, 
• soil fertility is to be maintained primarily through the use of well rotted compost, which has been prepared with the biodynamic compost 
preparations, 
• all areas are to be sprayed with the biodynamic horn dung and horn silica preparations, 
• no use of copper in vegetables, use of copper on perennial crops is restricted to max. 3kg/ha/year. 
Naturland (Germany, US, Europe) • Entire operation must be converted to organic farming
www.naturland.de • Focus on soil fertility and soil building measures, restricted total external organic fertilizer inputs
• Limits on the use of copper (3 kg/ha/yr)
• Seeds must not be treated (even not easily unavailable)
• Obligation to promote bio-diversity and have ecological balance areas
• No burning of trees or organic materials, not clearing of virgin forests
• Annual crops: at the very least 1/6 of agricultural area should be leguminous in the crop rotation pattern
• Detailed and well defined requirements for smallholder organizations internal control systems.
Soil Association (UK) For crop production the main differences to the EU-Regulation are:
www.soilassociation.org • no GMO crops (e.g. GM testing sites) in a radius of 9 km around organic farms; 5 years conversion period following the growing of a GM crop
• specific conversion requirements (soil building phase necessary, and may not be switched in and out of organic production)
• Maximum heavy metal levels in soil and manure
• 10 m buffer zone to conventional fields (if no hedge)
• Certain organic fertilizer restricted: peat (prohibited), sulphate of potash (restricted); certain crops may not be planted on the same field (potatoes, 
brassicas) for one year in four.
• Plant protection: metaldehyd prohibited
Bio Suisse (Switzerland) • As per Swiss Organic ordinance, the conversion period for organic products is 2 years only; products may be labeled as “conversion” from the 5th 
www.bio-suisse.ch/uploads/e_bibliothek_9-1.pdf month of conversion onwards. The begin of conversion is usually the date of the first inspection (if no unallowed inputs have been used from then 
onwards) and cannot be set retrospectively further than to January of the first year of inspection. 
In addition to the requirements of the Swiss Organic Ordinance (in most aspects equivalent to Regulation (EEC) N° 2092/91), Bio Suisse projects are 
required to fulfill the following criteria:
• Overall Management Policy (whole farm operation must be managed according to Bio Suisse requirements, animal husbandry at least according to 
IFOAM minimum criteria); sometimes a binding 5 year conversion plan towards fully organic production is accepted.
• Areas set aside to foster biodiversity (hedges extensively managed pastures or meadows, extensively managed orchards, nature reserves, etc.) must 
comprise at least 7% of the land used for agricultural purposes
• Limits on the use of copper (max. 4kgneat Copper/ha/year or 1,5 kg/ha for pome fruits and 2 kg/ha for berries)
• Limits on the use of fertilizers (crops max. 225 kg N/ha/yr, 90 kg P2O5/ha/yr, for vineyards:180kg N, 70 kg P2O5  and fruit producers: 
55 kg N, 20 kg P2O5 )
• Processors and traders also need to be inspected according to Bio Suisse criteria in particular with regard to handling Bio Suisse products separate 
from mere “organic” goods; Bio Suisse processing standards apply.
• No air shipment of goods; only products that are at the time of marketing not available in Bio Suisse quality within Switzerland can be labeled as 
Bio Suisse.
• Smallholder projects: Minimum requirements for participation as outlined in the Naturland Smallholder Certification Manual apply (see Chapter 
Certification Smallholders), with well-working internal control system that fulfils the high Bio Suisse standards, still 20% of all farmers need to be 
inspected annually by the inspection body (unless very well organized ICS; reasons for lower inspection rate stated and explained by certification 
agency)
6.10. Certification Requirements for
Smallholder Organizations
Group Certification
Rules on the type and extent of inspections of smallholder
organization in third countries must be equivalent (rather
then identical) to the provisions of Regulation (EEC) N°
2092/91. The regulation requires an annual inspection of
every organic farm; however, the majority of agricultural
products are produced in countries of the third world, most-
ly by small growers in remote regions, who do not have
access to adequate roads and infrastructure. Since huge
numbers of farmers can be involved, it appears essential
that a practical and cost-effective inspection scheme be
applied that simultaneously enables the control body to
guarantee effective, appropriate checks on the production,
processing and marketing if organic products40. 
Therefore, many certification bodies have developed
systems for inspection of small holder organizations based
on the combination of an Internal Control System (ICS)
operated and managed by the organization itself, and the
external inspection and certification scheme, comprised of
the supervision process for a certain percentage of farmers
(e.g. 10%) as well as the ICS itself. This type of inspection
is often referred to as “group certification”.
Smallholder organizations can be regarded as a production
unit in the sense of Regulation (EEC) No. 2092/91 if such
an organization represents a certain structure comprising
principles such as40:
< A legal relation is existing between the individual
farmer and the organization. Also, the organization
is the legal representative of the farmer with respect
to inspection and certification of his agricultural
production.
< The organization is in charge of the main responsibili-
ties such as purchase and central marketing, imple-
mentation of production measures, supervision of the
performance of the members. 
Such organizations can be organized as co-operatives,
federal associations of co-operatives or contract production
(e.g. exporter with a certain number of contracted produc-
ers).
According to the IMO/Naturland Manual for Internal
Control Systems in smallholder organizations40, an internal
control system consists of the following major elements
that are described in more detail in the following chapters:
a) Internal Regulation: defining the criteria, standards
and internal procedures to guarantee the quality of the
organic production;
b) Personnel: responsible for running the total quality
management program (supervisors, inspectors, com-
mittee members etc.) with clearly defined responsibili-
ties;
c) Infrastructure: means of transport, adequate data
processing facilities etc.;
d) Training and Information: of farmers and internal
inspectors according to the principles of organic farm-
ing and the specific certification requirements that are
laid down in the internal regulation; and training of
staff.
e) Internal Farm Control:
• Physical farm inspections: to prove the compliance
of the production activities with the requirements
laid down in the internal regulation. The inspection
activities must cover 100% of all registered farmers.
• Evaluation: to evaluate the results of the inspections
and to grant approval or disapprove.
• Documentation: To document all inspection and
evaluation activities.
f) Monitoring of Product Flow: Monitoring and docu-
mentation of all steps of product flow (purchase, trans-
port, stocking, processing, sales)
40 Augstburger, F. et al, 2002, Manual for Quality Assurance: A
Guideline of Internal Control Systems in smallholder Organisations,
Naturland e.V. (www.naturland.de).
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
271
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
These elements are illustrated in the following organization chart:
Source: Naturland Guideline for Internal Control Systems (ICS) in smallholder Organizations41
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
272
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE MEMBERS
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
QUALITY CONTROL SYSTEM
EXTERNAL SUPPORT
NATURLAND
• support
Figure 5: 
Organisation chart of the quality control system of a small farmer’s association
1. Staff - quality control
2. Internal regulation
• development
• updating
3. Infrastructure
• means of transport
• data processing facilities
4. Training
• of the farmers, of the staff
• of the internal inspectors
• topics: ecological farming
certification process
internal standards
identification and separation
internal controls, documentation
5. Internal farm control
5.1 Physical Farm Inspection
• of the farmers, post harvestprocessing,
stocking
• by internal inspectors
• summary of results
5.2 Evaluation
• internal decisions and sanctions
• summary of results
5.3 Documentation
• list of farmers controlled
• list of approved and sanctioned farmers
• internal checklists
• maps 
6. Monitoring the product flow
• purchase, transport
• stocking Centers, warehouses
• processing and sales
• identification and separation
• documentation of all steps
MANAGEMENT
ADMINISTRATION
PROCESSING
EXPORTS
FARMERS
Applicability of Group Certification
A group of farmers wishing to apply for group certification
usually should fulfill some basic requirements:
< The group should be big enough to make an ICS 
reliable and financially feasible.
< Farmers should be rather similar in terms of geographical
location, products and production systems and also
regarding the size (not many small farmers and a 
couple of huge farms)
< In principle group certification is designed for “small
farmers”, i.e. all farmers that cultivate more than about
25 ha (the average cultivated lad for small scale farmers
may vary slightly in different countries or crops) must
be inspected by the external control body on an annual
basis. Also these farms need to keep their own farm
documentation
The Internal Control System
1. The Internal Regulation
The smallholder organization should define its own internal
regulation with regard to various aspects and activities of
the organization, and this has to be followed by the members
and internal staff as well as contracted partners (e.g.
processors). No farmer can be expected to read the EU-
Regulation in order to understand how he needs to manage
his farm, nor can purchase officers simply read a certain
chapter of the regulation to be fully aware of their obliga-
tions. This is why it is very important to define clear and com-
prehensive rules for specific situations in the organization.
The internal regulation is also the basis for the internal
inspection and its content and completeness is verified in the
course of the external inspection. Often the internal regulations
are a combination of the content of farmers’ agreements
and internal working procedures, and may even exceed the
regulation in certain aspects.
41 Augstburger, F. et al, 2002, Manual for Quality Assurance: A
Guideline of Internal Control Systems in smallholder Organisations,
Naturland e.V. (’www.naturland.de) 
The following aspects should be clearly defined for the
organization in writing. Obviously, when developing the
internal regulation the organization has to keep in mind all
the standards for which it is applying for certification, making
sure to always at least define the minimum certification
requirements that are relevant for its operation.
Organic Production Standards
< Principles (reference to the applicable standards):
seeds, crop rotation, preservation of soil fertility, 
off-farm inputs
< Definition of the production unit of the farmer 
(e.g. organic crops, conventional cash-crops, home
consumption crops, animal husbandry) 
< Policy on conventional farm unit: usually conventional
farm units cannot be accepted in smallholder organizations.
If some members could not yet convert all their land and
crops (esp. home consumption crops), plans to support
farmers towards full conversion need to be worked out.
The ICS has to also closely supervise the conventional
fields, in particular if rotation annual crops are
involved (no conventional fields may be used for
organic production for 2 years) and the conventional
unit needs to be defined clearly
All the rules as described above for management of
operations with an organic and a conventional unit
apply (no risk of drift, separate storage of inputs, etc.)
< Harvest and post harvest procedures: procedures
for all on-farm processing by single farmer:
• separation according to quality (already on the 
farm if necessary); only allowed processing inputs
• maybe hygienic requirements for the farmers 
(not compulsory)
< Purchase: only from those farmers that are listed in
the farmers´ list that has been approved by the certi-
fication body (Approved farmers list “AFL”) and
only up to a maximum of those quantities that were
certified for this farmer
• detailed documentation of purchase in purchase 
book, receipts to farmers
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
273
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
• transport only in correctly identified and closed 
bags, labeling according to organic quality 
(organic, conversion)
• rules for organic processing (if applicable)
< Sanctions and approval:
• definition of sanctions for different non-compli-
ances: e.g. sanctioned for 3 years if  non-permitted
inputs are used, but only sanctioned for 1 year if 
he has failed to ensure some internal rules – only
procedures – to ensure that farmers that have not
complied with the internal regulation, especially
regarding production standards, are sanctioned for
the prescribed time. The internal control must
supervise and document the enforcement of 
sanctions. It may be helpful to keep a list of 
sanctioned farmers (also listing farmers that have
left the project) with date and reasons for 
sanctions/dismissal.
< Rules of participation: admittance of new farmers,
obligations of participating farmers, formal 
commitment (written confirmation). A farmer can
only be certified if he has signed this agreement with
the organization.
< Formal commitment: 
• the farmer is obliged to comply with the 
production standard and the internal regulation, to
grant the internal and external inspector unlimited
access and to provide all documents needed.
Sometimes the requirement is added that the
farmer may only sell produce from his own 
certified land to the organization as organic (not
from family members or neighbors)
• the organization is obliged to train and inform its
members on practices related to organic farming
and also about all certification requirements, to
establish quality and price criteria for the organic
produce.
< Internal inspection: 100% inspection of all growers
need to be inspected internally each year, before harvest
(if clear harvest season); inspectors shall be neutral.
2. Staff
Qualified personnel is needed in order to guarantee the
quality of organic products:
The Quality Manager 
The quality manager carries the responsibility on the per-
formance of the internal control system and is in charge of
ensuring 100% of the internal inspection, instructing the
internal inspectors, documenting all inspection activities,
participating in approval procedures and co-ordinating the
external inspection
Approval Committee
In larger organizations there may be need for an approval
committee to revise all inspection reports and decide on
approval or disapproval of member farmers. The members
of the approval committee must be familiar with the
organic system and shall not be directly involved in
marketing activities
Field Extensionist
Some organizations choose to have field extensionists vis-
iting and training the farms on a regular basis. Obviously,
this provides some continuous supervision of the farmers,
but still there should be one complete internal inspection by
an internal inspector per year. Field extensionists shall be
especially well trained in organic production methods such
as e.g. soil management, erosion control, biological pest
control, etc.
The Internal Inspector
An internal control system requires a sufficient number of
internal inspectors to perform 100% of the internal inspec-
tions per year. The internal inspectors must be fluent in the
local language, know local conditions and farming meth-
ods well, be trained in organic requirements and proce-
dures. He must not have conflicts of interest, e.g. should not
inspect farms of his own or of relatives, etc. If the project
also has an extension service, the internal inspector may
also be an extensionist, but be dedicated to inspecting
farmers from another extension group.
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
274
3. Infrastructure
Obviously the organization needs to be able to provide 
necessary infrastructure so that internal control can be realized
and documented in an efficient manner, e.g. means of
transport, purchase localities, data processing facilities, etc.
4. Training and Information
Farmers: need to be regularly trained in all relevant aspects
of organic farming as well as the content and implications
of the internal regulation. Often such training can be
offered by local NGO’s.
Internal Inspectors: regular training of internal inspectors
in crucial to ensure that every inspector evaluates the farms
in a similar way and easily recognizes deficiencies.
Sometimes it is also helpful to exchange internal inspectors
from different project parts, so that they can give each other
the feedback on the quality of their inspections.
Other Personnel: purchase personnel in particular need to
be well trained in organic requirements.
All training activities shall be documented and available for
the external inspection.
5. Internal Farm Control
Physical Farm Inspections
The main purpose of the physical farm inspections is to
verify that all farms registered in the organic program are
working according to the production standards set as part of
the internal regulation and that all farmers that do not comply
are sanctioned immediately.
To meet this requirements the internal inspection has to be
organized in a professional way:
< For the first inspection of a new farmer a full description
of his farm unit shall be drawn up: definition of land
parcels (all plots cultivated by the farmer), storage and
production premises, post-harvest measures (if 
applicable). A map of the farm unit must be drawn.
The last use of non-permitted inputs on any plot need
to be recorded. All measures to ensure compliance
with the internal regulation need to be discussed and
confirmed by the farmer.
< 100% internal control have to be ensured (see above)
by a neutral inspector. Also, suspended or “passive”
farmers need to be inspected if they wish to be 
re-registered again in the organic program later. 
The inspection shall be finalized before harvest, since
the resulting farmers´ list with exact yield estimations
is the basis for the organic purchase and provides the
necessary control that farmers only deliver their own
produce (and not those from their neighbors, etc.)
< the inspection visit has to cover all fields that are 
managed by a farmer, but focuses on the organic 
production unit (with cash crops) as well as home 
consumption units. If there is a conventional unit is
also shall be checked in order to ensure the separation
of units. Also, animal husbandry shall be taken into
consideration. Checks must be made to see if the total
certified area has changed and if new fields have been
bought in the field history; should this be the case,
these plots have to be verified.
< the use of all off-farm inputs (incl. seeds) has to be
checked carefully. Also, soil management is assessed. 
< Post harvest facilities, warehouses and storage premises
need to be inspected.
< On a spot check basis the sales information from the
farmers shall be cross-checked with the purchase 
documentation.
Evaluation
< The results of the internal inspection as summarized 
in the internal inspection reports need to be evaluated
farm by farm against the production and other relevant
standards in the internal regulation. 
< The results of the evaluation including imposed 
sanctions need to be documented and communicated
to the responsible parties. The final decision with
regard to certification of a farmer is taken, however,
by the external inspection body in the course of the
annual certification. 
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
275
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
Documentation
< An internal inspection report (checklist) needs to be
filled in documenting the results of the inspection (seeds,
fertilization, plant protection, risk of contamination, 
sustainability of farming system, animal husbandry, areas
under main cash crop(s), harvest estimation, compliance
statement (and possibly conditions to farmer), signature
internal inspector as well as farmer).
< An annual summary of the results of the internal control
is prepared. This is usually the list of farmers (organic,
conversion, sanctioned). The list should include the
following information for each farmer: location, farmers
code, full name, first year of inspection, total area, 
surface under main cash crop (or N° of trees if better),
conversion and conventional areas, yield estimation,
name/ code internal inspector, date internal inspection,
result of internal inspection. If feasible, the amount deliv-
ered to organization in previous year shall also be listed.
< For each farmer the following documents need to be
available: 
• map on which all plots can be seen, preferably on
cartographic maps, but otherwise as hand-drawn
sketch (if appropriate several neighboring farms
with their respective plots can be on one map) needs
to be up to date (and dated); new plots have to be
indicted accordingly, conventional fields have to be
clearly labeled, different rotation crops can be
indicated in the maps instead of plot list. etc.
• farmers agreement
• internal checklist(s) since begin of certification
• if applicable: other farm documentation e.g. held by
the extensionist for the farmers
6. Monitoring the Product Flow
Besides farm inspections the product flow of organic products
from fields to export has to be monitored by the ICS.
Purchase:
< The purchase officers need to have an updated farmers’
list (for most up to date harvest estimations and possibly
sanctioned farmers’) as well as the farmers’ list that has
been approved by the inspection body (for determination
whether farmer has been certified or not). 
< Organic produce may only be bought from farmers
named on the list, according to the different qualities
(organic, conversion, conventional) and only up to the
quantities indicated in the column harvest estimation
< Detailed records on the purchase from each farmer
have to be kept: purchase books with signature of
farmers, receipts, etc.
< Organic produce must not be mixed with conversion 
or conventional produce. For transport, the received
goods have to be packed in closed bags and labeled
according to their organic quality as well as lot 
number (if applicable). 
Storage  and  Processing
In the warehouse and in all following processing and trans-
port steps the organic goods must always be kept strictly
separate from any other produce and labeled accordingly.
External Inspection by the Certification Body
Each year, the external certification agency inspects the
smallholder organization. The inspection will focus on the
supervision of the internal control system by checking:
< Internal documentation, esp. internal inspection 
checklists, farmers files, internal regulation
< Verification of the effectiveness of internal control by
spot checks. Presently at least 10% of all farmers are
visited each year. In certain cases, lower or higher 
levels of external control may be required, according
to the country of import.
< Internal procedures and capacities of personnel
< Inspection of all processing and export units.
< Verification of product flow; cross-checking between
different documents and sources of information.
In order to perform the inspection in an efficient manner,
good preparation is required and all documents need to be
readily available.
In addition to the annual inspection, spot checks may be
conducted.
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
276
6.11. Import Procedures for Organic
Goods into the EU
As described in chapter 6.3, there are basically two ways
that imported produce can be marketed as organic in the
European Union (EU)
< the country of origin is listed on the Art. 11-list of
third countries that are considered equivalent to the
EU-Regulation. In this case, no import authorizations
are required, but each shipment needs to be accompanied
by a certificate of inspection (transaction certificate).
Presently there are only 6 countries on this list: Israel,
Argentina, Australia, Switzerland, Czech Republic 
and Hungary.
< For all other countries, the importer in the EU has to
apply for import authorization for each exporter he
wishes to import organic produce from. In addition for
each shipment a certificate of inspection (transaction
certificate) is required.
Since this is by far the most prominent venue, organ-
ic goods enter the EU, this option id described in more
detail in this chapter. However, it has to be noted that the
requirements and interpretations given in this chapter
may change quickly and therefore always need to be
verif ied with the certif ication agency and the trading
partners.
Import Authorizations
An import authorization, also called “individual authorization”,
is the legal act issued by a competent authority in the country
of import, that organic goods imported by a certain
importer in Europe from a certain exporting project outside
the EU can be considered equivalent to EU-produced
organic produce, and may therefore be marketed as organic
in Europe.
Since import authorizations are granted by the com-
petent authority in the country of import, presently a
large number of authorities is active in assessing this
equivalency, and producers as well as decisions may
vary quite considerably  from one country of import to
another.
The importer usually has to complete a particular
application form that has to be complemented by docu-
ments issued by the inspection body of the exporter that
confirm the equivalence of the organic produce. All these
application documents (that may include the full inspec-
tion report) are sent to the competent authority, who then
issues the import authorization that is valid for one to sev-
eral years. 
An import authorization usually clearly defines: the
exporter as well as all involved production and processing
units. This is also important to keep in mind as an exporter,
because it implies that if produce are purchased from new
certified operations (not from new smallholders, but e.g.
from other organizations), the importer has to be informed
in order to update his import authorization. Sometimes
even new products may need to be explicitly announced to
the import authorities.
Generally, it is the importer’s responsibility to ensure
correct and complete documentation for import authori-
zation, but the exporter may be required to provide certain
information (e.g. inspection report) or to inform his
inspection body to provide the necessary documents and
information.
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
277
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s
The following table highlights some important features
for import authorizations into the most important European
countries:
Certificates of Inspection (Import Certificates,
Transaction Certificates)
In addition to the import authorization that remains valid
for a longer period, the importer requires a certificate of
inspection for each shipment/delivery of organic goods
received(also referred to as import certificate or transaction
certificate) issued by the inspection body of the exporter.
Article 11, Par. 1b and 3 of Regulation (EEC) N° 2092/91
deals with certificates of inspection and inspection.
On 1st Nov. 2002 (planned for 1.7.02 and postponed to
November) the new additional legislation Regulation (EEC)
N° 1788/2001 of 7.9.2001 came into force , laying down
detailed rules for implementing the provisions concerning
the certificate of inspection for import from third countries.
The new requirements that were drafted as a result of
various cases of fraud are extremely detailed and are
expected to make international organic imports even more
complicated. The most important aspects now required for
organic exports will be:
< For import of all countries (countries on Art. 11 list as
well as all other countries) a certificate of inspection 
is required for each consignment. The inspection 
certificate will in most cases be issued by the 
inspection body of the exporter in the third country on
basis of certification documents, transport papers 
(bill of lading) and commercial export invoice. 
It may not be altered and there is only one original
document. 
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
278
Table 101: 
Important Features for Import Authorizations into European countries
Country Brief description of procedures and special issues
GERMANY  AND  AUSTRIA • Different competent authorities for different federal states ’ requirements and focus of the authorities can vary considerably; often low acceptance of 
retrospective approval of conversion period; 
• Application form defines all exporters, processing units production units as well as produce.  A confirmation of equivalence needs to be signed by 
the inspection body of the export; inspection reports are required.
France • Very detailed application form (dossier) instead of submitting the full inspection report
• Application form need to be completed by inspection body of exporter or inspection body of importer on basis of inspection reports
• Higher external control rates may be required esp. for smaller smallholder organizations
Holland • Simple procedures with importers competing application form and sending in  the inspection reports of exporters and producers to LASER.
England / UK • Application form to DEFRA/UKROFS rather detailed, no inspection report required, but several confirmations issued by the certification agency of 
the exporter (GMO confirmations, no sodium nitrate confirmation, confirmation that precautionary measures are effectively applied), certain 
information may be needed from exporter/inspection body in order to even complete the application form.
• Considering national law to demand at least 1 year certified conversion
Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Finland • Simple procedures with importers completing application form and sending in  the respective inspection reports to their competent authorities.
ITALY • Very slow processing of import authorizations (up to one year)
• Inspection reports and certificates required and application form to be filled in by importer. All documents need to be originals from the certification 
body of the exporter.
SPAIN • Inspection reports and certificates required and application form to be filled in by importer.
BELGIUM • Applications for import authorizations can only be prepared/pre-evaluated by the two registered certification agencies BLIK and Ecocert Belgium. 
These will require the inspection reports for processing the application.
• Special requirements for smallholder organizations may apply.
SWITZERLAND • Detailed application form to be completed by importer; attestation of equivalence needs to be completed by inspection body of exporter
• Different definition of conversion period ; no conventional farm units permitted ’ see remarks on certification requirements for Bio Suisse.
< The content, appearance and format of the certificate
is defined in the regulation and may not be altered
< The original certificate has to be presented at customs
in order to release organic goods for free circulation 
in the European Community. Information on the 
certificate is to be counterchecked with all transport
documentation and physical labeling of goods 
(lot numbers)
< The competent import authority who has issued the
import authorization for the respective importer needs
to confirm the existence of a valid import authorization
in Field 16 of the certificate. This can be used in 
different states in different ways. Presently, the method
chosen by most member states is to issue the importer
an original authorization confirmation with all origin
and product details to be presented together with the
inspection certificate at the customs.
< The term “import” as defined in Regulation (EEC) 
N° 2092/91 is now clearly related to the physical 
flow of goods, i.e. it is not the entity who appears on
sales invoices who is to be considered as the importer,
but instead the entity for which the goods are custom
cleared into the European Union. 
E.g. an Italian importer buying organic coffee from 
a coffee wholesales in Holland but receiving the coffee
shipments directly from Bolivia, and therefore custom
clearing them in Italy ,is now to be considered the
importer, and is hence obliged to hold his own import
authorization
< First companies consigned in the European union 
(i.e. mostly warehouse companies) now have to 
confirm in field 18 of the certificate that the reception
of the goods has been carried out in accordance with
Regulation (EEC) N° 2092/91, Annex III, Part C, Par.7 
If a consignment is spilt into small consignments before
custom clearing an extract of the certificate of inspection
can be issued.
P r i n c i p l e s  o f  I n s p e c t i o n  a n d  C e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  O r g a n i c  P r o d u c t s
279
S t a n d a r d  a n d  R e g u l a t i o n s

A N N E X
Further Literature and 
Useful Webpages
1
Chapter A: Further Literature
IFOAM Training Manual on Organic Agriculture in the
Tropics, Compiled by FiBL in June 2002. Download at
www.ifoam.org.
This training manual offers a resource basis for trainers
with the idea of encouraging individual adaptation and
further development of the material according to the needs.
The training manual can be used as a guide and source book
to implement training programs on organic agriculture in
the tropics. 
IFOAM-Proceedings of the 13th International IFOAM
Scientific Conference. Compiled by T.Alfoeldi et al. Vdf
Zurich 2000, ISBN 3 7281 2754 X.
656 abstracts of the participants of the 13th International
IFOAM Scientific Conference. Many interesting contributions
from tropical and subtropical countries.
IFOAM-Proceedings of the 14th Organic World Congress.
Compiled by R.Thompson. Canadian Organic Growers,
Ottawa 2002, ISBN 0-9695851-5-2.
656 abstracts of the participants of the 14th Organic World
Congress. Many interesting contributions from tropical and
subtropical countries.
Organic Coffee, Cocoa and Tea. Market, certification and
production information for producers and international
trading companies. Swiss Import Promotion Programme
(SIPPO), Forschungsinstitut für biologischen Landbau
(FiBL), Naturland,  Zürich /Frick /Gräfelfing, February
2002, ISBN 3-906081-06-0
The attractively designed handbook offers production and
market information for producers and international trading
companies. In addition, the handbook provides an easily
accessible overview of the production, processing and trade
requirements applicable in Switzerland and the EU. The
handbook contains an extensive collection of addresses
(trading companies, authorities, certification bodies,
organizations etc.) and Internet websites. 
The Market for Organic Food and Beverages in Switzerland
and the European Union. Overview and market access
information. Swiss Import Promotion Programme (SIPPO)
und Forschungsinstitut für biologischen Landbau (FiBL),
Zürich/ Frick Januar 2001, ISBN 3-906081-03-06
The aim of this handbook is to inform operators in emerging
markets and markets in transition about the market
potential and the conditions for access to the European and
Swiss markets for organic products. To that end, it assembles
useful facts and figures, notes and comments and contact
addresses.
Organic Agriculture Worldwide 2002. Compiled by
M.Yussefi and H.Willer. SÖL Sonderausgabe 74, 2002,
ISBN 3-934499-42-2
The complete and actual collection of statistics and future
prospects about organic agriculture worldwide. This
publication can be downloaded from the internet at
http://www.soel.de/inhalte/publikationen/s_74_04.pdf
Agricultura orgánica. Compiled by Albrecht Benzing,
Neckar-Verlag, Villingen-Schwenningen (D) 2001,
ISBN 3-7883-1912-7.
A detailed compilation of the scientific base and many
examples of organic farming in the Andes of Latin America. 
Raising and Sustaining Productivity of Smallholder
Farming Systems in the Tropics. Compiled by Willem
C.Beets. AgBé Publishing, Alkmaar (NL) 1990.
ISBN 974 85676 1 3.
This book collects many useful smallholder farming prac-
tices of the tropics. 
Agroforestry for Soil Management. Compiled by A.Young,
CAB International Oxon (UK) and New York (USA) 1997,
ISBN 085199 189 0.
This book summarizes the present state of knowledge and
indicates needs for research. 
F u r t h e r  L i t e r a t u r e
282
Useful Webpages
http://www.ifoam.org
The homepage of the International Federation of Organic
Agriculture Movements. From this homepage, it will be
possible to download the IFOAM Training Manual on
Organic Agriculture in the Tropics. Furthermore, it contains
many useful links.
http://www.soel.de
The website of Stiftung Ökologie & Landbau (SÖL)
(Foundation Ecology & Agriculture). Contains European
and world wide organic farming statistics (it is possible to
download the publication ”Organic Agriculture Worldwide”)
and a useful address database as well as many useful links.
http://www.fibl.ch/
The website of the Research Institute for organic agricul-
ture (FibL) provides information on organic agriculture,
training opportunities and contacts to other organizations
involved in organic agriculture
http://www.isofar.org
The homepage of the International Society of Organic
Agriculture Research (ISOFAR). Its objective is to promote
and to encourage research in all branches of organic
agriculture and to facilitate the co-operation of scientific
activities, education and knowledge transfer on a global
scale by means of various membership services, its publi-
cations, events and scientific structure. The homepage
wants to improve the world-wide scientific dialogue in
Organic Agriculture and enable participatory research and
stakeholder dialogue. 
http://www.organic-research.com
Organic-research.com is an online community for organic
farming and food, developed by CABI Publishing.
Organic-research.com will be of particular interest to
those actively involved in organic farming research and
development.
http://www.organicxseeds.com
The organicXseeds database lists organic seed and trans-
plants supplied by seed companies from all over Europe.
A special service offered by organicXseeds allows you to
request the seeds and transplants you require directly from
the supplier.
U s e f u l  W e b p a g e s
283
F u r t h e r  L i t e r a t u r e  a n d  U s e f u l  W e b p a g e s
Chapter B: Further Literature
Citricultura: laranja, limao e tangerina. Compiled by O.K.
Koller, Editora Rigel LTDA, Porto Alegre (Brazil) 1994,
ISBN 85-85186-59-3.
This book describes the brazil way of citrus production.
Pests and diseases are described in detail. 
Manual para productores de naranja y mandarina de la
region del rio uruguay. Compiled by Instituto Nacional
de Tecnologia Agropecuaria (INTA), Argentina 1996,
ISBN 950-9853-72-0.
This book shows how citrus is produces in South America.
Pests, diseases and weeds are good illustrated. 
Citrus – Crop Production Science in Horticulture Nr. 2.
Compiled by F.S. Davies and L.G. Albrigo. CAB International
Oxford 1994, ISBN 0 85198 867 9.
This manual gives a complete overview on citrus production
and considers the most important production regions. 
Tropical and Subtropical Fruits. Compiled by P.E. Shaw,
H.T. Chan Jr. And S.Nagy. AGSCIENCE, INC, Auburndale,
Fl (USA) 1998, ISBN 0-9631397-6-2.
A large number of scients contributed to this complete
introduction in tropical and subtropical fruits. 
Fruticultura Tropical. Compiled by J.A. Samson. Editorial
Limusa, Mexico 1991. ISBN 968-18-4009-7.
A short but valuable introduction in tropical and subtropi-
cal fruits. 
Tropical Fruits. Compiled by CAB Internacional, Wallingford
1998, ISBN 0-85199 254 4.
This book shows the different tropical fruits in a general
point of view. 
Bananas and plantain. Compiled CAB Internacional,
Wallingford 1996, ISBN 0-85198-985-3.
A complete review on banana production.
Report of the expert consultation on avocado production
development in Asia and the Pacific. Compiled by FAO
REGIONAL OFFICE FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC,
Bangkok (Thailand) April, 1999 
A good overview on the avocado production techniques in
selected countries.
Chapter C: Further Literature
Nippon 2000 business facts and figures (JETRO)
Marketing Bulletin 1999, 10, 24-37; Philip Gendall:
Japanese Market for Organic Fruit and Vegetables
Sogo Market Research (2000)
Organic Monitor: European Market for Organic Fruit and
Vegetables (2000)
IFOAM/SOEL: World Organic Agriculture Report (2002)
Organic Trade Association (OTA): Organic Export Study
(2000) (order through website: www.ota.com)
The Market for Organic Food and Beverages in Switzerland
and the European Union. Overview and market access
information. Swiss Import Promotion Program (SIPPO)
und Forschungsinstitut für biologischen Landbau (FiBL),
Zürich/ Frick Januar 2001, ISBN 3-906081-03-06
FIBL/SYNERGIE: Der Fachhandel für Bio-Produkte in
Europa (2002)
FAO/ITC: World markets for organic fruit and vegetables:
Opportunities for Developing Countries in the Production
and Export of Organic Horticultural Products (2001)
(2001, TC/D/Y1669E/9.01/6730) book can be ordered
through the ITC Website: www.intacen.org
FAS-Report Organic Products in Singapore (2001)
www.intracen.org/mds/sectors/organic/
Website of ITC on organic agriculture
F u r t h e r  L i t e r a t u r e
284
Part D: Further Literature and
Useful Websites
Further Literature
The Market for Organic Food and Beverages in Switzerland
and the European Union. Overview and market access
information. Swiss Import Promotion Program (SIPPO)
und Forschungsinstitut für biologischen Landbau (FiBL),
Zürich/ Frick Januar 2001, ISBN 3-906081-03-06
The aim of this handbook is to inform operators in emerg-
ing markets and markets in transition about the market
potential and the conditions for access to the European and
Swiss markets for organic products. To that end, it assem-
bles useful facts and figures, notes and comments and con-
tact addresses.
EU Regulation “Organic Farming”. Compiled by H.Schmidt
and M.HacciuS. Margraf Verlag 1998, ISBN 3-8236-1288-3
A well ordered and very detailed discussion of the EU
Regulation. Helps to understand the often unnecessarily
complicated structure and language of this regulation. 
Useful Websites
http://www.codexalimentarius.net
This is the only official website of the Codex Alimentarius
Commission. It provides information about Codex
Alimentarius. The Codex-Alimentarius-Guidelines on
organic agriculture can be downloaded from:
www.fao.org/codex/standard/organic/gl99_32e.pdf
http://europa.eu.int/eurlex/de/lif/dat/1991/de_391R2092.html
The EUR-Lex website contains all texts pertaining to EU
Regulation No. 2092/91 on organic production in all the
languages of the EU. 
http://www.usda.gov
Donwload the US Organic Foods Production Act. 
http://www.wto.org/ 
The website of the World Trade Organization gives the
current status of the negotiations on the Agricultural
Agreement and international commitments to reduce
agricultural subsidies.
http://www.iafinc.org/
The Mutual Recognition Agreement (MLA) may be viewed on
the website of the International Accreditation Forum (IAF). 
http://www.european-accreditation.org/
The Multilateral Agreement for inspection and certifica-
tion bodies is available on the homepage of the “European
co-operation for Accreditation” organization. 
http://www.iso.ch/
The homepage of the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO), which has its headquarters in Geneva,
contains details of ISO 65 pertaining to certif ication
bodies. 
http://www.cenorm.be/
The web pages  of  the  European Commit tee  for
Standardization (CEN) give full details of EN Standard
45011.
http://www.ifoam.org/accredit/index.html
This is the accreditation program of the International
Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements. 
http://www.blw.admin.ch/nuetzlich/links/
d/zertifstellen.htm
On the homepage of the Swiss Federal Off ice for
Agriculture there is a downloadable list of European
certification bodies.
F u r t h e r  L i t e r a t u r e  a n d  U s e f u l  W e b s i t e s
285
F u r t h e r  L i t e r a t u r e  a n d  U s e f u l  W e b p a g e s
http://www.blw.admin.ch/ 
The website of the Swiss Federal Office for Agriculture
provides detailed information on: 
• The Swiss Organic Farming Ordinance 
• Forms for attestation of equivalence and individual
authorization to import 
• Direct payments for organic farms 
• Cultivation of organic products. 
http://www.zoll.admin.ch 
Customs tariffs of the Federal Customs Administration. 
http://www.sas.admin.ch
The Swiss Federal Office of Metrology is the accreditation
body for  inspect ion and cer t i f icat ion bodies  in
Switzerland. 
http://www.sippo.ch 
The homepage of the Swiss Import Promotion Programme
(SIPPO) contains information on Swiss activities to
promote imports from emerging markets and markets in
transition, downloadable documentation.  
http://www.bio-suisse.ch 
The website of BIO SUISSE (Association of Swiss
Organic Agriculture Organizations, Vereinigung Schweizer
Biolandbau-Organisationen) provides detailed information
onStandards relating to farming and processing; approval
procedures for the Knospe, and market and prices 
http://www.Naturland.de
The website of Naturland – Association for Organic
Agriculture from Germany. 
http://www.demeter.net
The website of Demeter-International. It gives information
about the network of individual Demeter certification
organisations world-wide.
http://www.maxhavelaar.ch/ 
The website of Max Havelaar Switzerland, one of the most
important Fair Trade organizations. 
The complete JAS Regulations can be downloaded at:
http://www.maff.go.jp/soshiki/syokuhin/hinshitu/
organic/eng_yuki_top.htm
http://www.cbi.nl
The website of the Centre for the Promotion of Imports
from Developing Countries. 
http://www.intracen.org
The website of the International Trade Centre (UNC-
TAD/WTO (ITC). Provides statistic information on
exports/imports worldwide and on markets of different sectors.
http://www.fao.org
The website of the food and agriculture Organization
(FAO) provides general information about organic agricul-
ture and the programs of FAO.
http://www.sida.se
The website of the Swedish International Development Co-
operation Agency - Department for Infrastructure &
Economic Co-operation (SIDA).
http://www.grolink.se
The website of a swedish organic certifier Grolink, giving
information about Certification, Training and studies on
organic agriculture.
http://www.gtz.de
The website of “Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische
Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH provides information about
projects, GTZ international services and Public Private
Partnership.
U s e f u l  W e b s i t e s
286
A N N E X
List of trading companies, certification 
bodies and authorities by country
2
This annex lists a number of trading compa-
nies, certification bodies and authorities by
country. The collection makes no claim to
being complete.
USA
Organic Fresh Produce
Importer/Distributors 
ALBERT’S ORGANICS
1330 East, 6th. Street
Los Angeles, CA 90021
Tel: +1- 213-891-1310
Fax: +1- 213-891-9291
www.albertsorganics.com
Leading wholesale distributor
of organic fresh produce with
warehouses in Los Angeles, New Jersey, 
Colorado and Florida 
BEST FRESH PRODUCE INC.
220 Food Centre Drive
Bronx, NY 10474
Tel: +1- 718-617 8300 ext. 243&227
Fax:+1-  718-991 9748
markhill@orderfresh produce.com
www.orderfresh produce.com 
BETA PURE FOODS
335 Spreckels Drive Ste. D
Aptos, CA 95003
Tel: +1-  831-685-6565
Fax: +1- 831-685-6569
Morr@betapure.com
www.betapure.com
Supplies ingredients to natural food
industry 
BOCCHI AMERICAS, INC.
1113 Admiral Peary Way, Navy
Yard, Philadelphia, PA 19112
Tel: +1- 215-462-7540
Fax: +1-215-462-7542
Bam@bocchiamericas.com 
BOULDER FRUIT EXPRESS, INC.
340 South Taylor Ave.
Louisville, CO 80027
Tel: +1- 303-666-4242
Fax:+1- 303-666-0323
www.boulderfruit.com
Promotes and distributes 
organic perishables through 
the Rocky Mountains and Midwest. 
DEL CABO
2450 Stage Road
Pescadero, CA 94060
Tel: +1-415-879-0580
Fax: +1-415-879-0930
Importer/wholesaler/distributor
CF FRESH/ROOTABAGA ENTERPRISES
PO Box 665
Sedro-Woolley, WA 98284
Tel:+1-  530-676-9147
Fax:+1-  530-676-9148
deidre@directcon.net
Represents organic fruit and 
vegetables growers world-wide 
CHARLIE’S FRESH PRODUCE
PO Box 24606
Seattle, CA 98124
Tel: +1- 206-625-1412
Fax: +1- 206-682-4331
Importer, warehouse of specialty
organic fresh produce 
C.H. ROBINSON COMPANY
8100 Mitchell Rd, Ste 9000
Eden Prairier, MN 55344
Tel: +1- 952-937-8500
Fax: +1-952-937-7703
Sheila.tanquist@chrobinson.com
www.chrobinson.com
CRIS-P FRESH PRODUCE CO., INC.
2811-2 North Palenque Ave.
PO Box 7348
Nogales, AZ 85628
Tel: +1- 520-281-9233
Fax: +1- 520-281-4699 
CROWN PACIFIC INTERNATIONAL, LLC
PO BOX 11360
Hilo, HI 96721
Tel: +1- 808-966-4348
Fax:+1- 808-966-4167
crown_pacific@yahoo.com 
DUNN NATURAL PRODUCTS L.C.
4734 Sergeant Rd.
Waterloo, IA 50701
Tel: +1- 319-233-5504
Fax: +1- 319-233-9452
Imports and distributes organic fresh produce 
FARMERS FRUIT EXPRESS
PO Box 73, Leggett, CA 95585
Tel: +1- 707-925-6453
Fax: +1- 707-925-6454
ffx@humbolt.net
Specializes in organic fresh produce 
FRANK CAPURRA & SON
2250 Salinas Road, PO Box 410
Moss Landing, CA 92039
Tel: +1- 931-728-1767
Fax:+1- 831-728-4807 
U S A
288
FRIEDA’S INC.
4465 Corporate Center Drive
Los Alamitos, CA 90720-2561
Tel: +1- 714-826-6100
Fax:+1- 714-816-0273
friedas@aol.com
www.friedas.com 
GARDEN STATE FARMS
3655 South Lawrence Street
Philadelphia, PA 191148-5610
Tel: +1- 215-463-8000
Fax: +1- 215-467-1144
www.procaccibrossalescorp.com 
GLOBAL BERRY FARMS
2241 Trade Center Way, Ste A
Naples, FL 34109
Tel:+1-  941-591-1664
Fax:+1- 941-591-8133
mklackle@blueberries.com 
JONATHANS ORGANICS
170 Middleboro Road
East Freetwon, MA 02717
Tel: +1- 508-763-5505
Fax: +1- 508-763-2334
Jonathan@capecod.net
Importer and distributor 
of full line of organic
fruits and vegetables 
J & J DISTRIBUTING
653 Rice Street
Saint Paul, MN 55103
Tel: +1-651-221-0560
Fax:+1- 651-221-0570
Kevinh@jjdst.com
www.jjdst.com
Importer and wholesaler 
JBJ DISTRIBUTING
PO Box 1287
Fullerton, CA 92831
Tel: +1- 714-992-4920
Fax: +1- 714-992-0433
Broker/distributor 
of organic and conventional 
fruit and vegetables 
MAUI FRESH INTERNATIONAL
391 Taylor Blvd Ste 105
Pleasant Hill, CA 4523
Tel: +1- 925-676-6284
Fax:+1- 925-676-6339
mike@mfresh.com 
MELISSA’S
5325 S. Soto St.
Los Angeles, CA 90021
Tel: +1- 800-468-7111
Fax: +1- 323-588-2242
hotline@melissas.com
www.melissas.com 
NEW WORLD MARKETING DBA: 
MADE IN NATURE FRESH
2902 East La Palma Ave.
Anaheim, CA 92806
Tel: +1- 714-632-0300
Fax: +1- 714-632-0345
garffH@newworldmktg.com
Importer/distributor 
of organic fresh produce 
NORTHBEST NATURAL PRODUCTS
PO Box 1976
Vashon, WA 98070
Tel: +1- 206-463-4000
Fax:+1- 206-463-4001
Info@northbest.com
Importer and warehouse 
of organic products 
ONEONTA
One Oneonta Way
Wenatchee, WA 98807
Tel: +1-509-663-2631
Fax: +1-509-663-6333
scottm@oneonta.com
www.oneonta.com 
OREGON ORGANIC MARKETING, INC.
358 West 8th. Avenue
Eugene, OR 97401
Tel: +1- 541-687-9535
Fax:+1- 541-687-9536
Hollyh@oregonorganic.com
www.oregonorganic.com
Specializes in organic fruits and vegetables 
PACIFIC ORGANIC FRESH PRODUCE
1311 Sutter Street Ste. 203
San Francisco, CA 94109
Tel: +1- 415-673-5555
Fax: 1- 415-673-5585
Steve@pacorg.com
www.pacorg.com
Importer and representative of organic
growers and packers in US
and South America 
PROCACCI BROTHERS SALES CORP.
3655 S. Lawrence Street
Philadelphia, PA 19148-5610
Tel: +1- 215-463-8000
Fax:+1- 215-467-1144
www.procaccibrossalescorp.com 
RLB FOOD DISTRIBUTORS
2 Dedrick Place, CN 2285
West Caldwell, NJ 07007
Tel: +1- 973-575-9526
Fax: +1- 973-575-4811
Rlb@rlbfood.com
www.rlbfood.com
Supplies full line of conventional and
organic fruits and vegetables 
U S A
289
L i s t  o f  t r a d i n g  c o m p a n i e s ,  c e r t i f i c a t i o n  b o d i e s  a n d  a u t h o r i t i e s  b y  c o u n t r y
SUTHERLAND FRESH PRODUCE
SALES, INC.
11651 Shadow Glen Road
Al Cajon, CA 92020
Tel: +1- 619-588-9911
Fax:+1- 619-588-9595
Broker of organic fresh produce from grow-
er to distributor 
UNITED APPLE SALES, INC.
12 S. Putt Corners Road
New Paltz, NY 12561-1602
Tel: +1- 845-256-1500
Fax:+1- 845-256-9550
www.unitedapplesales.com 
VALLEY CENTER PACKING CO. INC.
28425 South Cole Grade Road
Mail: PO Box 1920
Valley Center, CA 92082
Tel: +1- 460-749-5464
Fax: +1- 760-749-2898
vcp@tfb.com
Importer and packer of organic citrus, 
avocados and seasonal exotics 
VERITABLE VEGETABLES
1100 Cesar Chavez Street
San Francisco, CA 94124
Tel: +1- 415-641-3500
Fax: +1- 415-641-3505 
Ksalinger@vertablevegetables.com
Importer wholesaler of organic fresh pro-
duce 
Certification Bodies
CALIFORNIA CERTIFIED ORGANIC
FARMERS (CCOF)
Contact Sue Teneyck
1115 Mission Street
Santa Cruz, CA 95060
Tel: 831-423-2263
Fax: 831-423-4528
www.ccof.org 
FARM VERIFIED ORGANIC
Contact: Annie Kirschenmann
5449 45th Street SE
Medina, ND 58467
Tel: 701-486-3578
Fax: 701-486-3580
FVOINTL@aol.com 
FLORIDA CERTIFIED 
ORGANIC GROWERS 
& CONSUMERS, INC.
Contact: Marty Mesh
PO Box 12311
Gainesville, Florida 32604
Tel: 352- 377- 6345
Fax: 352- 377-8363
fogoffice@aol.com
www.foginfo.org 
GLOBAL ORGANIC ALLIANCE, INC.
Contact: Betty Kananen
3185 TWP Road 179
PO Box 530
Bellefontaine, Ohio 43311
Tel: 937- 593-1232
Fax: 937- 593-9507
kananen@logan.net 
ORGANIC CROP IMPROVEMENT 
ASSOCIATION
(OCIA)
Contact: Diane Bowen
1001 Y Street, Suite B
Lincoln, Nebraska 68508-1172
Tel: 402-477-2323
Fax: 402-477-4325
info@ocia.org
www.ocia.org 
ORGANIC GROWERS AND BUYERS
ASSOCIATION (OGBA)
Contact: Sue Cristan
8525 Edinbrook Crossing, Ste 3
Brooklyn Park, MN 55443
Tel: 763-424-2450 or 800-677-6422
Fax: 763-315-2733
ogba@goldengate.net
www.ogba.org 
OREGON TILTH CERTIFIED ORGANIC
Contact: Pete Gonzalves
1800 Hawthorn NE - Suite 200
Salem, Oregon 97303
Tel: 503- 378-0690
Fax: 503- 378-0809
http://www.tilth.org
organic@tilth.org 
QUALITY ASSURANCE
INTERNATIONAL (QAI)
Contact: Marian Casazza
12526 High Bluff Dr, Suite 300
San Diego, CA 92130
Tel: 858-792-3531
Fax: 858-792-8665
qai@qai-inc.com
www.qai-inc.com 
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT 
OF AGRICULTURE
Contact: Miles McEvoy
PO Box 42560
Olympia, Washington 98504-2560
Tel: 360-902-1877
360-902-2087
mmcevoy@agr.wa.gov
U S A
290
CANADA
Wholesaler and 
Supermarket Chain
A & P  CANADA
The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea
Company 
5559 Dundas St. West, Etobicoke, ON
M9B 1B9
Tel: +1-416  239-7171
Fax: +1-416 234-6527
www.aptea.com
LOBLAW COMPANIES Ltd.
22 St. Clair Avenue East, Toronto, ON
M4T 2S7 Canada
Tel.: +1-416 922-2500
Fax: +1-416 922-4395
www.loblaw.com
PROORGANICS 
4535 Still Creek Ave., Burnaby, BC
V5C 5W1  Canada
Tel.:+1-604 253-6549
Fax: +1-604 253-6702
www.proorganics.comSAFEWAY
(Alberta, Vancouver, Winnipeg)
1020 64th Avenue NE, Calgary Alberta
T2E 7V8 Canada
Tel.: +1-877-723-3928
www.safeway.com
SOBEYS ATLANTIC DIVISION
293 South Ford, Stellarton, NS
B0K 1S0, Canada
Tel: +1-902 755-1830
www.sobeys.com
THE BIG CARROT 
348 Danforth Avenue, Toronto, ON
M4K 1N8 Canada
Tel.: +1-416 466-2129
Fax: +1-416 466-2366
www.thebigcarrot.ca
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
Wholesaler, Retailer
BILLA SUPERMARKET
(belonging to REWE Group)
IZ NÖ Süd Str. 3 Obj. 16
A-2355 Wr. Neudorf
Tel: +43-2236-600 6930
Fax: +43-2236-600 7690
thomas.rogy@billa.co.at  
(department fruits and vegetables)
www.billa.at
SPAR SUPERMARKET GROUP
Taborstr. 95
A-1200 Vienna
Tel: +43-1-3300539 726
Fax: +43-1-3303322
harald.rauchegger@spar.co.at 
(department fruits and vegetables)
www.spar.at
Importer 
JOHANN ISCHIA & CO
Im- und Exportgesellschaft
mbH & Co
Amraserstr. 6
6020 Innsbruck/Tirol
Tel: +43/512/52015-0
Fax: +43/512/52015-15 
OBST HUBER FRUCHTIMPORT 
GESMBH
Neinergutstr. 28-30
4600 Wels
Tel: +43/7242/404-0
Fax: +43/7242/404-147
Import Firms Specialized in Organic
Products 
AL NATURKOST
Schulgasse 35
2542 Kottingbrunn
Tel. +43- 2252 77218 
NATÜRLICH WEBER
A- 3932 Kirchberg/Walde 52
Tel: +43- 2854 20417
Fax: +43- 2854 631016
office@weber-austria.at
Organic Certification Bodies
ABG AUSTRIA BIO GARANTIE
Königbrunnerstr 8
A-2202 Enzersfeld
Tel. 02262/672212
Fax 02262/674143
nw@abg.at
BIOS BIOKONTROLLSERVICE ÖSTER-
REICH
Feyregg 39
4552 Wartberg
Tel: 07587/7177 14
Fax 07587/7177 11
LACON
4122 Arnreit 13
Tel. 07282/7711
Fax 07282/7711 4
LEBENSMITTELVERSUCHSANSTALT
Blaasstr. 29 – 1190 Vienna
Tel. 01/3688555
Fax 01/3688555 20
SGS AUSTRIA CONTROLL & CO
Ges.m.b.H.
Johannesgasse 14
1015 Vienna
Tel. 01/5122567
Fax 01/5122567 9
C a n a d a  –   A u s t r i a
291
L i s t  o f  t r a d i n g  c o m p a n i e s ,  c e r t i f i c a t i o n  b o d i e s  a n d  a u t h o r i t i e s  b y  c o u n t r y
FRANCE
Retailer and Wholesaler
AUCHAN
Centrale d’achats
200 rue de la Recherche
59656 Villeneuve-d’Ascq Cedex
Tel: +33-3 20 67 55 78
Fax: +33-3 28 37 61 39
E-mail: pfrisch@auchan.com
www.auchan.com
(Meat, bread, milk, 
convenience foods)
BIOCOOP
22 Cours Gambetta
F-65000 Tarbes
Tel: +33-562 341037
Fax: +33-562 441596
www.biocoop.fr
CARREFOUR
PO Box 75
Zae de Saint Guénault
1 rue Jean Mermoz
F-91002 Evry Cedex
Tel: +33-160 913737
Fax: +33-160 794498
www.carrefour.com
LA VIE CLAIRE
36 rue Jeanne d’Arc
F-60200 Compiègne
www.lavieclaire-reims.com
MONOPRIX SA
3 rue Paul Cézanne
F-75008 Paris
Tel: +33-140 751515
Fax : +33-140 751516
www.monoprix.fr
PRONATURA
MIN 68
PO Box 70
F-84953 Cavaillon Cedex
Tel: +33-490 787304
Fax: +33-490 787314
patrice@pronatura.com
www.pronatura.com
AUX RAYONS VERTS
41 rue Léon Blum
F-51100 Reims
Tel : +33 –4 67 58 68 58
Fax : +33- 4 67 58 59 70
Importer of Fruits and Vegetables
ARCADIE SA
1115 route d’Uzès 
30100 Alès 
Tel.. +33-4 66 56 99 33 
Fax: +33-4 66 30 62 61
www.arcadie-sa.fr
Spices, fresh and dried culinary herbs, dried
vegetables, herbal teas
BIOPRIM
530 Av. de Milan 
ZI du Grand Saint Charles 
66000 Perpignan 
Tel: +33-4 68 54 79 79 
Fax: +33-4 68 54 57 68 
Email: contact@bioprim.com
www.bioprim.com
DYNAMIS FRANCE
15 avenue des trois marchés
Batiment B 4a 
Fruileg 766
94637 Rungis Cedex 
Tel: +33-145 60 43 44 
Fax: +33-146 87 44 05
www.dynamis.fr
EURO BREIZH
8 rue des Martyrs 
29270 Carhaix-Plouguer 
Tel: +33-2 98 99 25 20 
Fax: +33-2 98 99 25 21
Cereals and leguminous vegetables
EXODOM
28 rue Jules Carteret  – 69007 Lyon
Tel:+33-4.37.28.73.50
Fax: +33-4.37.28.73.54
E-mail: exo-dom@wanadoo.fr
www.exodom.com
IMAGO
Marché St. Charles BP 5129
66031 Perpignan
Tel: +33-4 68 68 40 40 
Fax: +33-4 48 68 40 48 
Email: imago1@wanadoo.fr
JK NATURE
ZI La Saussaye
124 rue du Rond d’Eau  – 45590 Orléans
Tel: +33-2 38 25 00 70 
Fax. +33-2 38 25 00 77
STÉ ARCADA FRANCE
Domaine du Blazy
47130 Port-Sainte-Made 
Tel: +33-5 53 87 20 24 
Fax. +33-5 53 87 26 18 
Email: arcada@ins.France.com
UNI-VERT
Route de Bellegarde
30129 MANDUEL
Tel: +33 4 66 20 75 25
Fax: +33 4 66 20 75 26
uni-vert@uni-vert.com
www.uni-vert.com
F r a n c e
292
VIABIO
21, rue des Iscles
BP 15 13834 Chateaurenard – Cedex
Tel: +33 4 90 94 12 00
Fax: +33 4 90 94 02 68
E-mail: viabio@viabio.com
Processors and Packers
DISTRIBORG FRANCE
217 chemin du Grand Revoyet 
69561 St-Genis-Laval  – Lyon 
Tel: +33-4 72 67 10 20 
Fax: +33-4 72 67 10 57
www.distriborg.com
Extensive range
LE GOÛT DE LA VIE S. A. 
83 boulevard Montparnasse 
75006 Paris 
Tel: +33-1 53 63 24 70 
Fax: +33-1 53 63 24 71 
E-mail: vscherrer@legoutdelavie.com 
http://www.legoutdelavie.com
Dried products and dairy products
MARKAL
ZA Les Plaines 
26320 St-Marcel-lès-Valence 
Tel: +33-4 75 58 72 20 
Fax: +33-4 75 58 81 85
E-mail:markal@markal.fr
www.markal.fr
Cereals, cereal products, rice, grains, legu-
minous vegetables
STÉ BIO D‘ ARMOR
La Croix Rouge 
Ergué - Gabéric 
29556 Quimper Cedex 9 
Tel: +33-2 98 59 58 00 
Fax: +33-2 98 59 69 99
Fresh products and dried products
STÉ BONNETERRE (GROUP
DISTRIBORG)
1 place des Planteurs 
94538 Rungis Cedex 
Tel: +33-1 49 78 25 00 
Fax: +33-1 46 87 91 68
Dairy products, fresh fruit and vegetables,
cereals, vegetable oils, flour, jams and mar-
malades, dried fruit
Certification and Accreditation
Organizations
AFAQ-ASCERT INTERNATIONAL 
116 avenue Adstride Birand
BP 83
92225 Bagneaux Cedex 
Tel: +33-1 46 15 70 60 
Fax: +33-1 46 15 70 69 
COFRAC
37 rue de Lyon 
75012 Paris
Tel: +33-1 44 68 82 58 
Fax: +33-1 44 68 82 48 
ECOCERT SA
BP 47
32600 L’Isle-Jourdain
Tel: +33-5 62 07 34 24 
Fax: +33-5 62 07 1167 
E-mail: ecocert@compuserve.com 
www.ecocert.fr
QNPC 
(Qualité Nord-Pas-de-Calais)
241 avenue de la République 
59110 La Madeleine
Tel: +33-3 28 38 94 84 
Fax: +33-3 28 38 90 87 
QUALITE FRANCE 18 RUE VOLNEY
75002 Pads
Tel: +33-1 42 61 58 23 
Fax: +33-1 42 60 5161 
GERMANY
Processors and Packers
BEUTELSBACHER
FRUCHTSAFTKELTEREI GMBH
Birkelstr. 11
D-71384 Weinstadt-Endersbach
Tel: +49-7151-995150
Fax: +49-7151-9951555
info@beutelsbacher.de
www.beutelsbacher.de
fruit juices
BIOS
Gabriele Rempe GmbH
Grossmarkt-Frischezentrum
D - 59010 Hamm
Tel.: +49 - 2381 - 543250
Fax: +49 - 2381 - 5432540
www.bios-hamm.de
fruits and vegetables for catering companies
DAVERT MÜHLE
Ascheberger Str. 2
D-48308 Senden
Tel: +49-2598-6931
Fax: +49-2598-6962
Cereals, pulses, oils, pasta, rice
BIO-BETRIEB KÄPPLEIN GMBH
Am Fernmeldeturm 6
D - 68753 Waghäusel
Tel.: +49 - 7254 - 60975
Fax: +49 - 7254 – 950228
fruits and vegetables for catering companies
ERNST WEBER NATURKOST
Postfach 750954 – D-81339 München
Tel: +49-89-746 3420
Fax: +49-89-746 34222
weberNK@t-online.de
fruits, vegetables, dates, seeds, tea, jucies
F r a n c e  –  G e r m a n y
293
L i s t  o f  t r a d i n g  c o m p a n i e s ,  c e r t i f i c a t i o n  b o d i e s  a n d  a u t h o r i t i e s  b y  c o u n t r y
HIPP-WERK
Münchner Str. 58
D-85276 Pfaffenhofen a.d. Ilm
Tel: +49-8441-757 481
Fax: +49-8441-757 492
www1.hipp.de
organic baby food
LEHMANN NATUR GmbH
Am Churkamp 20
D-47059 Duisburg
Tel: +49-203 932550
Fax: +49-203 932 5599
Lehmann-Natur@t-online.de
www.lehmann-natur.com
fruits and vegetables
NATURKOST SCHRAMM
Ludwing-Winter-Str. 6
D-77767 Appenweier
Tel: +49-7805-96680
Fax: +49-7805-966880
team@naturkost-schramm.de
www.naturkost-schramm.de
fruits and 
vegetables
Importer 
and Distributor of 
Organic Products
ALNATURA PRODUKTIONS- 
UND HANDELS GMBH
Darmstädter Strasse 3
D-64404 Bickenbach
Tel: +49-257 93 220
Fax: +49-6257 932 244
E-mail: Alnatura@t-online.de
www.alnatura.de
Dried products
ALLOS WALTER LANG IMKERHOF
GMBH
Zum Streek 5 – D-49457 Mariendrebber
Tel: +49-5445 9899-0
Fax: +49-5445 9899-114/ -125
E-mail: info@allos.de
http://www.allos.de
Cereals, processed fruits, amaranth products,
cakes, honey
AURIS NATURKOST VERTRIEBS
GMBH
D-28091 Bremen
Tel: +49-421 396 0180
CARE NATURKOST GMBH & CO KG
Rudolf-Diesel-Str. 30
D-28876 Oyten
Tel: +49-4207 914 444
Fax: +49-4207 7185
Grains, seeds, dried fruit, nuts
DENREE VERSORGUNGS GmbH
Hoferstr. 11 – D-95783 Töpen
Tel: +49-9295-180
Fax: +49-9295-1850
zentrale@dennree.de
www.dennit.de
GEORG RÖSNER VERTRIEBS GMBH
Regensburger Str. 32 
D-94315 Straubing 
Tel: +49-9421 23619 
Fax: +49-9421 81736
Nuts, seeds, cereal flakes, dried fruit
LANDLINIE LEBENSMITTEL-
VERTRIEB GMBH & CO KG
An der Hasenkaule 24 
D-50354 Hürth-Kalscheuren 
Tel: +49-2233 974510 
Fax: +49-2233 9745199
E-mail:f.Mueller@landlinie.de
www.landlinie.de
Fresh products
RAPUNZEL NATURKOST AG
Haldergasse 9
D-87794 Legau
Tel: 0049-8330-910124
www.rapunzel.de
RILA FEINKOST-IMPORTE GMBH &
CO KG
Hinterm Teich 5
D-32351 Sternwede-Levern
Tel: +49-5745 9450
Fax: +49-5745 945 139
www.rila.de
Extensive range
Wholesaler, Retailer
BERGQUELL AGRAR-NATUR-
PRODUKTE GMBH & CO KG
Klosterhof 5 
D-38312 Dorstadt 
Tel: +49-5337 92510 
Fax: +49-5337 925123 
E-mail: BergquellNaturhoefe@t-online.de
Fresh products: Fruits, vegetables, 
eggs, meat, poultry meat, 
dairy products, dried products
DÖHLER GMBH
Riedstrasse 7-9
D-64295 Darmstadt
Tel: +49-61513060
Fax: +49-6151 306339
E-mail: michael.nocker@doehler.com
www.doehler.com
Mainly fruit-based raw materials 
for food production
FOOD PRODUCERS
Nestlé Alete GmbH
Tel: +49-180 23 44 944
http://www.alete.de
Prepared jars of organic food, babyfood
GRÜNER PUNKT NATURKOST GMBH
Schwanenkirchnerstr. 28
D-94491 Hengersberg
Tel: +49-9901 1842
Fax: +49-9901 1875
G e r m a n y
294
E-mail: streit@bayemwald.com
Processed fruits
GEPA GMBH
Bruch 4 
D-42279 Wuppertal 
Tel: +49-202 266 830 
Fax: +49-202 266 8310
www.gepa3.de
Coffee, tea, honey, 
chocolate, nuts, 
rice, further products
MÜHLDORFER NATURKORNMÜHLE 
GMBH (PRIMA VERA)
Mühlenstrasse 15 
D-8444 Mühldorf 
Tel: +49-863 137 730 
Fax: +49-863 137 7349 
www.prima-vera.de
Cereals, rice, millet, sugar, oil-seeds, 
nuts, further products
MILUPA GMBH & CO KG
Bahnstraße 14-30
D - 61 381 Friedrichsdorf
Tel: +49-06172 - 99 0
http://www.milupa.de
Prepared jars of organic food
REWE AG
Domstr. 20
D-50668 Köln
Tel: +49-221 1490
Fax: +49-221 149 9000
www.rewe.de
TEGUT ...  GUTE LEBENSMITTEL
Gerloser Weg 72
D-36039 Fulda
Tel: +49-661-104-400
www.tegut.de
TERRA FRISCHDIENST
Gross-Berliner-Damm 83
D - 12487 Berlin-Johannisthal
Tel.: +49 - 30 - 631 05 16
Fax: +49 - 30 - 631 69 75
www.terrafrisch.de
ÜBELHÖR KG
Friesenhofen-Bahnhof 23-25 
D-88299 Leutkirch 
Tel: +49-7567 820 
Fax: +49-7567 834 
E-mail: uebelhoer@t-online.de 
www.gaia-naturkost.de
Cereals, leguminous 
vegetables, nuts, dried fruit, 
sweeteners
VOELKEL AG
Fährstr. 1
D-29478 Höhbeck
Tel: +49-5846-9500
Fax: +49-5846-95050
www.voelkeljuice.de
Label Programmes and 
Certification Bodies
NATURLAND- Verband für naturgemässen
Landbau e.V.
Kleinhadernerweg 1
D-82166 Gröfeling
Tel: +49-89 898 08 20
Fax: +49- 89 80 82 90
E-mail: naturland@naturland.de
BCS ÖKOGARANTIE 
GMBH
Cimbemstr.21
D-90402 Nümberg
Tel: +49-911491 73
Fax: +49-911 492 239
E-mail: bcsgermany@AOL.com
ECOCONTROL ECOCERT 
GMBH
Sulte 20a
D-37520 Osterode
Tel: +49-5522 951 161
Fax: +49-5522 951 164
E-mail: ecocert@compuserve.com
GFR GESELISCHAFT FUR
Ressourcenschutz
Prinzenstr.4
D-37073 Goffingen
Tel: +49-551 586 57
Fax: +49-551 587 74
E-mail: info@gfrs.de
http://www.gfrs.de
ÖKOPRÜFZEICHEN (ÖPZ) 
GMBH 
Rochusstrasse 2 
D-53123 Bonn 
Tel: +49-228 9777700 
Fax: +49-228 9777799
GREAT BRITAIN
Wholesaler , Retailer
ASDA
Asda House
Great Wilson St.
Leeds LS11 5AD
Tel: + 44 1132 435435
Fax: + 44 1132 418304
www.asda.co.uk
FRESH & WILD
210 Westbourne Grove
London W11 2RH
Tel: +44-20-7792 9020
Fax: +44-20-7792 1341
www.freshandwild.com
G e r m a n y  –  G r e a t  B r i t a i n
295
L i s t  o f  t r a d i n g  c o m p a n i e s ,  c e r t i f i c a t i o n  b o d i e s  a n d  a u t h o r i t i e s  b y  c o u n t r y
GRIFFIN & BRAND EUROPEAN LTD
Trophy House, Leacon RD
Ashford, Kent TN23 4TU
Tel: + 44 1233 645 941
Fax: + 44 1233 639 340
griffin.brand@dial.pipex.com
Wholesaler of fruit and
vegetables 
INFINITY FOODS
67 Norway St.
Portslade, East Sussex
Tel: + 44 1273 424060
Fax: + 44 1273 417739
www.infinityfoods.co.uk
Importers and wholesalers of
wide range of organic produce 
ORGANIC FARM FOODS OF WALES
Llambed Estate, Lampeter 
Carmarthenshire SA48 8LT 
Tel: +44-1570 423099 
Fax: +44-1570 423280 
E-mail: petersegger@offcom
www.organicfarmfoods.co.uk
Extensive range, incl. fresh fruits and
vegetables and exotic 
specialities
PLANET ORGANIC
42 Westbourne Grove
London W2 5SH
Tel: +44-207-221 7171
Fax: +44-207-221 1923
www.planetorganic.com
SAINSBURY LTD
Stamford House
London SE1 9LL
Tel: +44-207-6950024
Fax: +44-207-6957507
www.sainsbury.co.uk
TESCO
Tesco House
Delamare Rd., Cheshunt
Hertfordshire EN 8 9SL
Tel: +44-1992-646372
Fax: +44-1992-644075
www.tesco.com
WAITROSE
Doncastle Rd.
Southern Industrial Area
Bracknell, Berkshire RT12 4YA
Tel: +44-1344-424680
Fax: +44-1344-825072
www.waitrose.com
Processor and Importer
BABY ORGANIX
Organix Brands plc
No.4 Fairfields Close
Christchurch
Dorset BH23 1QZ
Tel: + 44 1202 479701
Fax: + 44 1202 479712
www.babyorganix.co.uk
Fast growing processor /importer/distrib-
utor of baby foods
CONGELOW PRODUCE LTD
Den Farm Lane, Collier Street 
Tonbridge, Kent TN 12 91DX 
Tel: +44-1892 730447 
Fax: +44-1892 730566
Fruits and vegetables
COMMUNITY FOODS
Brent Terrace 
London NW2 1 LT 
Tel: +44-181 450 9411 
Fax: +44-181 208 1551
Processed organic products, incl. dried
fruit and nuts, teas, vegetable oils, cere-
als, dried leguminous vegetables
HIDER FOOD IMPORTS
Wiltshire Road 
Kingston upon Hull HU4 6PA 
Tel: +44-1482 561137 
Fax: +44-1482 565668
www.hiderfoods.co.uk
Nuts and dried fruits, leguminous vegeta-
bles, herbs and spices, cereals, coffee,
bananas
HARLEY FOOD
Blindcrake Hall, Blindcrake 
Cockermouth GA13 OQP 
Fax. +44-1900 828276
Dried fruit, leguminous vegetables,
grains, 
herbs, cereals, rice
JUNIPER FINE AND FOODS
Unit 2, 
Downs Way Industrial Estate 
Tinwalds Downs Road, Heathall 
Dumfries DG1 3RS 
Tel: +44-1387 249333 
Fax: +44-1387 249900
Fresh, chilled and deep-frozen foods and
beverages, cereals
G r e a t  B r i t a i n
296
MACK MULTIPLES
Tranfesa Rd
Paddock Wood
Kent, TN12 6UT
Tel: + 44 1892 835 577
Fax: + 44 1892 834 890
www.mackmultiples.com
Imports of fruit and vegetables 
ORGANIC MARKETING COMPANY
Unit 1, 
Leighton Court Lower Eggleton, 
Ledbury Herefordshire HR8 2UN 
Tel: +44-1531640819 
Fax- +44-1531 640818
Fruits and vegetables
SUMA WHOLEFOODS
Lacy Way
Lowfields Industr. Park
Elland, West Yorks
Tel: +44 845 458 2290
Fax: +44 845 458 22 95
www.suma.co.uk
Wholesaler and manufacturer of
organic vegetarian and vegan
products
THE QUIET REVOLUTION
The Coach House
6 Duncan St.
London N1 8BW
Tel: + 44 207 278 2121
Fax: + 44 207 278 1958
Processors of fresh organic soups
TROPICAL WHOLEFOODS
Unit 9 Industrial Estate
Hamilton Rd
London SE27 9SF
Tel: + 44 208 670 114
Fax: + 44 208 670 1117
Specialist in trade in tropical 
products from Africa - mainly 
dried fruit and vegetables
WEALMOOR LTD
Jetha House
Springfield Rd.
Hayes, Middx EB4 OJT
Tel: + 44 208 867 3770
Fax: + 44 208 867 3700
wealmoor@wealmoor.co.uk
www.wealmoor.co.uk
Leading UK producer, importer, 
packer and distributor of 
conventional and organic, 
exotic fruit, vegetables and legumes
Label Programmes and Certification
Bodies
BIO-DYNAMIC AGRICULTURAL
ASSOCIATION (DEMETER)
Woodman Lane
Clent, Stourbridge
West Midlands DY9 9PX
Tei: +44-1562 884933
ORGANIC FARMERS AND GROWERS
50 High Street, Soham, Ely
Cambridgeshire CB7 5HF
Tel: +44-1353 720250
ORGANIC FOOD FEDERATION
The Tithe House, Peaseland Green
Elsing, East Dereham
Norfolk NR20 3DY
Tel: +44-1362 637314
Fax: +44-1362 637398
SCOTTISH ORGANIC PRODUCER
ASSOCIATION
Milton of Cambus Farm, Doune
Perthshire FK16 6HG
Tel: +44-1786 841657
Fax: +44-1786 841657
THE SOIL ASSOCIATION
40-56 Victoria Street
Bristol BS1 6BY
Tel. +44-117 914 2400
Fax: +44-117 925 2504
E-mail: fblake@soilassociation.org
ITALY
Wholesaler , Retailer
ADRIA FRUIT
Piazza Rossetti 2/8 – 16129 Genova
phone +39 010 5767229
fax +39 010 5767249
E-mail: info@adriafruit.it
Bananas
BILLA ITALIA SRL
Via Postumia 15
35010 CARMIGNANO DI
BRENTA (PD)
Tel: +39.049.942.34.44
Fax +39.049.943.02.44 
www.billa.it
G r e a t  B r i t a i n  –  I t a l y
297
L i s t  o f  t r a d i n g  c o m p a n i e s ,  c e r t i f i c a t i o n  b o d i e s  a n d  a u t h o r i t i e s  b y  c o u n t r y
BOTTEGA E NATURA
Via Crea, 10
10095 GRUGLIASCO (TO)
phone ++39-011-77708948
E-mail: info@bottegaenatura.com
www.bottegaenatura.com
BRIO SPA
Via Manzoni 99
I-37050 Campagnola di Zevio (VR)
Tel: +39-045-8951777
Fax: +39-045-8731744
brio@briospa.com
www.briospa.com
CONAD-CONSORZIO NAZIONALE
Dettaglianti scarl
Via Michelino 59
40127 BOLOGNA (BO)
Tel: +39.051.508.111
Fax +39.051.508.247-
++39.051.508.414
E-mail: olg@conad.it
www.conad.it 
COOP ITALIA SCRL
Via del Lavoro 6-8
40033 CASALECCHIODI
RENO (BO)
Tel: +39.051.596.111
Fax +39.051.596.304-
Fax +39.051.596.218
www.e-coop.it 
DESPAR ITALIA SCRL
Via Caldera 21
20153 MILANO (MI)
Tel: +39.02.409.091
Fax +39.02.409.18.177 
www.edespar.it
ECOR SPA
Via Palù, 23
Loc Zoppé – I-31020 San Vendemiano
(TV)
Tel: +39-0438-7704
Fax: +39-0438-770447
info@ecor.it
www.ecor.it
ESSELUNGA
Via Giambologna 1
20090 LIMITO (MI)
Tel: +39.02.92.367
Fax +39.02.926.72.02 
www.esselunga.it
FINIPER
Via Mameli 19
27054 MONTEBELLO
DELLA BATTAGLIA (PV)
Tel: +39.0383.894.511
Fax +39.0383.592.257 
GRANDI MAGAZZINI E
SUPERMERCATI IL GIGANTE SPA
Via Clerici 342
20091 BRESSO (MI)
Tel: +39.02.240.42.51
Fax +39.02.26.22.43.02 
GS SPA – CARREFOUR
Via Caldera 21
20153 MILANO (MI)
Tel: +39.02.48.251
Fax +39.02.482.02.325 
www.carrefour.com
KI-GROUP
Tel: +39-011-7176700
Fax: +39-011-7176811
info@kigroup.com
www.kigroup.com
NATURASÌ SRL
Via Mura S. Bernardino, 1
37123 VERONA (VR)
Tel: +39-045-8030021
Fax +39-045-8031371
E-mail: naturasi@naturasi.com
www.naturasi.com
PAM
Via delle Industrie 8
30038 SPINEA (VE)
Tel: +39.041.549.51.11
Fax +39.041.999.393 
RINASCENTE/GRUPPO AUCHAN
Strada 8, Palazzo N - Milanofiori
20089 ROZZANO (MI)
Tel: +39.02.575.81
Fax +39.02.57.51.24.38 
SELEX COMMERCIALEMARKANT 
ITALIA SPA
Via Cristoforo Colombo 51
20090 TREZZANOSUL
NAVIGLIO (MI)
Tel: +39.02.484.571
Fax +39.02.48.45.77.00 
http://users.libero.it
I t a l y
298
VERITAS BIOFRUTTA SPA
Via San Francesco 5
36060 MAROSTICA (VI)
Tel: +39.0424-471.921
Fax +39.0424.471.920
E-mail: verybio@verybio.it 
VERONA BIO FRUTTA SCARL
Via dell’industria 3
37059 Zevio VR
Tel: +39 045 7851701
Fax +39 045 7851576
E-mail: veronabiofrutta@iol.it
Processors and Importer
ABAFOODS SRL
Via Ca’ Mignola vecchia 1775
45021 Badia Polesine RO
Tel: +39 0425 594489
Fax +39 0425 594496
E-mail: abafoods@libero.it
www.abafoods.it
concentrated juices
APOFRUIT SCARL
Via Ravennate 1345
I-47023 Cesena (FO)
Tel: +39-0547-643111
Fax: +39-0547-643166
info@apofruit.it
www.apofruit.it
BAULE VOLANTE srl
Via E. Matti, 48/11 H
I-40138 Bologna
Tel: +39-051-6008411
Fax: +39-051-538869
baule@baulevolante.it
www.baulevolante.it
BESANA SPA
Via Ferrovia 206
80040 SAN GENNARO
VESUVIANO (NA)
Tel: +39 -081-86.59.111
fax +39-081-865.76.51
www.vbesana.it
(only nuts and dried fruits)
COTRAPO SCARL
Via Trento 778-2
45024 Fiesso Umbertiano RO
Tel: +39 0425 740274
Fax +39 0425 741322
E-mail: cotrapo@cotrapo.it 
www.cotrapo.it
CONFRUIT
Via Emilia Ponente 4
48018 Faenza RA
Tel: +39 0546 623411
Fax +39 0546 621548
E-mail: info@ilpuntog.it
www.ilpuntog.it 
HANS ZIPPERLE SRL
Via M. Valier 3
39012 Merano BZ
Tel: +39 0473 274100
Fax +39 0473 274222 
www.zipperle.it
HERO ITALIA SPA
Via E. Fermi 6
37135 Verona
Tel: +39 045 8097111
Fax +39 045 8097200
www.hero.it
ORGANICSUR
Via Andrea Costa, 
112/2
I-40067 Rastignano (BO)
Tel: +39-051-6260361
Fax: +49-051-6265252
francodepanfilis@organisur.it
www.organicsur.it
SWEET
Via Duchessa Isabella 6
10011 AGLIÈ (TO)
Tel: ++39.0124.429.011
Fax ++39.0124.429.928
E-mail: sweet@rivarolo.alpcom.it
nuts and dried fruits 
Certification Bodies and Organizations
of the Organic Sector
AIAB Certification body
Strada Maggiore, 29
40125 BOLOGNA
phone ++39-051-272986
fax ++39-051-232011
E-mail: aiab@aiab.it
Web page: www.aiab.it 
ASS SUOLO E SALUTE
Certification body
Via Abbazia, 17
61032 FANO (PS)
phone ++39-0721-830373
fax ++39-(0)721-830373
E-mail: suoloesa@tin.it
Web page: www.suoloesalute.it 
I t a l y
299
L i s t  o f  t r a d i n g  c o m p a n i e s ,  c e r t i f i c a t i o n  b o d i e s  a n d  a u t h o r i t i e s  b y  c o u n t r y
BIOAGRICOOP
Certification body
Via Fucini 10
40033 CASALECCHIODI RENO (BO)
phone ++39-051-6130512
fax ++39-(0)51-6130224
E-mail: bioagri@mail.asianet.it
Web: www.bioagricoop.it 
BIOS Certification body
Via Monte Grappa, 7
36063 MAROSTICA (VI)
phone ++39-0424-471125
fax ++39-0424-476947
E-mail: itbios@tin.it 
CODEX
Certification body
Strada Naviglia, 11/A
43100 PARMA (PR)
phone ++39-0521-7759001
fax ++39-0521-775900 
CCPB
Certification body
Via Barozzi, 8
40126 BOLOGNA
phone ++39-051-254688
fax ++39-051-254842
E-mail: ccpb@ccpb.it
Web: www.ccpb.it 
ECOCERT
Certification body
C.so delle Province, 60
95127 CATANIA
phone ++39-095-442746
fax +39-095-505094
E-mail: ecocertitalia@ctonline.it 
IMC
Certification body
Via Pisacane, 53
60019 SENIGALLIA (AN)
phone ++39-071-7928725
fax ++39-071-7910043
E-mail: imcert@tin.it
Web: http://www.imcdotcom.com 
QC&I
Certification body
Villa Parigini, Loc. Basciano
53035 MONTERIGGIONI (SI)
phone ++39-0577-327234
fax ++39-0577-327234
E-mail: lettera@qci.it
Web: www.qci.it 
GRAB-IT
Organic Research,
Market research
c/o DIBIAGA-University of Ancona
Via Brecce Bianche
60125 ANCONA (IT)
phone ++39-071-2204929
fax ++39-071-2204858
E-mail: grabit@agrecon.unian.it 
FIAO
Umbrella body grouping most
certification bodies
Via Barozzi, 8
40126 BOLOGNA
phone ++39-051-254688
fax ++39-051-254842
E-mail: fiao@greenplanet.net 
JAPAN
Importers and Distributors
CHIKITA FRUITY JAPAN CO LTD
Plaza Monznen-Naka-Cho Building
3F, 1-4-8 Monzen-Naka-Cho, Koto-ku, 
Tokyo 135-0048
Tel: +81 3 52458287 
DAIEI CO LTD
Hamamatsu-cho Office Centre
building, 9F, 2-4-1, Shiba-koen, Minato-ku,
Tokyo 105-8514
Tel:+ 81 3 3433-9684 
DOLE JAPAN LTD 
(MAIN IMPORTER ITO CHU TRADING
COMPANY)
Sanbancho Yayoikan
6-2 Sanbancho Chiyoda-Ku
Tokyo 102-0075
Tel: +81 3 32371492
www.dole.co.jp/
GLOBAL FRUITS CO LTD
Ikaida Building 7F, 3-14-8
Hacchobori, Chuo-ku,
Tokyo 104-0032
Tel: +81 3 3553-5444 
JAPAN PRODUCE CO, LTD
Daiichi-Nakamira Building 5F, 2-
8-10 Shinkawa, Chou-ku, Tokyo
104-0033
Tel: ++81 3 3297-6211 
JUSCO Co Ltd (Food
Commodity Division)
5-1,1-Chome, Nakase, Mihama-ku,
Chiba-shi, Chiba, 261-8515
Tel: +81 3 432126164 
ITOCHU CORP (FOOD DEPARTMENT)
2-5-1 Kita-Aoyama, Minato-ku,
Tokyo 107-8077
Tel: +81 3 3497-6255 
MITSUBISHI CORPORATION
(FOOD HANDLING DIVISION)
Mitsubishi Shoji Building
Bekkan 2-3-1 Maranouchi,
Chiyoda-ku,
Tokyo 100-8086
Tel: +81 3 32106786 
I t a l y  –  J a p a n
300
MITSUI & CO LTD
2-1 Ohtemachi 1 Chome
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 100-0004
Tel: +81 3 32855668
www.mitsui.co.jp
Processor 
MUSO CO LTD
3-7-22 Nishitenma, Kita-ku,
Osaka 5300047 
Tel: +81 6 63166104 
MITOKU CO LTD
Room 257 Tokyo Building
2-7-3 Maranouchi, 
Chiyoda-ku,
Tokyo
Mail: C.P.O Box 780 Tokyo, 100-91
Tel: +81 3 32016701
SWITZERLAND
Wholesaler, Retailer
COOP Schweiz
Thiersteinerallée 152
CH-4002 Basel
Tel: +41-61-3366666
Fax: +41-61-3367491
www.coop.ch
MIGROS Genossenschafts-Bund
Limmatstrasse 152
CH-80005 Zürich
Tel: +41-1-2772111
Fax: +41-1-2772333
www.migros.ch
Processor, Distributor, Importer
ANDROS
Ch. de la Crétaux 
C.P. 413
CH-1196 Gland 
Tel: +41 - 22 995 08 00
Fax: +41 - 22 995 09 46
Orange juices
AGREXCO LTD.
Jungholzstr. 6
CH-8050, Zürich
Tel: +41 - 1-315 76 20
Fax: +41 - 1-315 76 70
www.agrexco.com
Fruits/vegetables
BARGOSA S.A.-GENÈVE
25. rue Biavignao,
CH-1227 Carouge-Genève
Tel: +41-22-343 71 60
Fax: +41-22-342 80 72
www.bargosa.ch
Fruits/vegetables
BIOFAMILIA AG
Brünigstrasse 141 
CH-6072 Sachseln 
Tel: +41 - 41 666 25 55
Fax: +41 - 41 666 25 50
www.bio-familia.com
Process nuts, sugar, dried fruit 
into muesli
BIOFARM-GENOSSENSCHAFT
Postfach 18 
CH-4936 Kleindietwil 
Tel: +41 - 62 957 80 50
Fax: +41 -62 957 80 59
www.biofarm.ch
Dried fruit and nuts, sugar
BIOFORCE AG
Abt. Heilpflanzenanbau 
CH-9325 Roggwil 
Tel: +41 - 71 - 454 61 61
Fax: +41 - 71 - 454 61 62
www.bioforce.ch
Herb salts, processed vegetables, 
whole grain rice
BIOGEMÜSE GALMIZ
Zährli 9
CH-3285 Galmiz
Tel: +41 - 26 – 670 42 42
Fax: +41 - 26 - 670 27 72
www.biogemuese.ch
Fresh vegetables
BIOTTA AG
Pflanzbergstr. 8 
CH-8274 Tägerwilen 
Tel: +41 - 71 - 666 80 80
Fax: +41 - 71 - 666 80 81
Juices, fresh vegetables
BLATTMANN
Seestrasse 201 
CH-8802 Wädenswil 
Tel: +41 - 1 783 40 40
Fax: +41 - 1 783 40 00
www.blattmann.ch/
Cereals and cereal products, oil-seeds, pro-
tein plants
BONATURA AG
Industriestrasse 7 
CH-3210 Kerzers 
Tel: +41 - 31 750 14 26
Fax: +41 - 31 750 14 24
www.bonatura.ch
Fresh fruits (raspberries)
CLARO AG
Byfangstrasse 19 
Postfach 69
CH-2552 Orpund 
Tel: +41 - 32 - 356 07 00
Fax: +41 - 32 - 356 07 01
www.claro.ch
Tea, coffee, sugar, sweeteners (muscovado),
fruits (only fair trade products!)
J a p a n  –  S w i t z e r l a n d
301
L i s t  o f  t r a d i n g  c o m p a n i e s ,  c e r t i f i c a t i o n  b o d i e s  a n d  a u t h o r i t i e s  b y  c o u n t r y
EICHBERG BIO AG
Seetalstrasse 60 
CH-5705 Hallwil 
Tel: +41 - 62 767 61 61
Fax: +41 - 62 767 61 67
www.eichberg-bio.ch
Protein plants, wine, sugar, honey, coffee,
cocoa, tea, cereals, 
oil-seeds, fresh fruits, juices, vegetables,
dried fruit and nuts
FAIRNESS HANDEL
Sedelstr. 32
CH-6020 Emmenbrücke
Tel: +41 -41-268 11 22
Fax: +41 -41-268 11 33
www.caritas.ch
Fair trade produce
FIRST CATERING PRODUKTION AG
Grindelstr. 11
CH-8303 Bassersdorf
Tel: +41- 1-838 50 00
Fax: +41 -1-838 50 01
www.firstcatering.ch
Vegetables/fruits
FRIGEMO AG PRODUCTION 
CRESSIER
Rte de Neuchâtel 49 
CH-2088 Cressier 
Tel: +41 - 32 758 53 69
Fax: +41 - 32 757 17 38
www.frigemo.ch
Fresh vegetables
FRUCTO LTD.
Schlosstrasse 1, 
CH-4654 Lostorf
Tel: 62-298 30 35
Fax: 62-298 30 36
E-mail: frutco@frutco.ch
Banana puree, mango pulp, etc.
J. CARL FRIDLIN AG
Bösch 61
CH-6331 Hünenberg
Tel: +41 -41-780 55 22
Fax: +41 -41-780 28 08
www.fridlin.ch
Spices
GRANOSA  AG
Eisenbahnstr.asse 41
CH-9401 Rorschach
Tel: +41 71 844 98 20
Fax: +41 71 844 98 30
GUGGER-GUILLOD SA
Rte de l’Industrie 5 
CH-1786 Sugiez 
Tel: +41 - 26 - 673 23 73
Fax: +41 - 26 - 673 19 04
www.gugger-guillod.ch
Fresh vegetables
GEORGES HELFER SA
Chemin De Fontenailles
CH-1196 Gland
Tel: +41 -22-9999999
Fax: +41 -22-9999988
www.helfergroup.ch
Avocados
HESS IMPORT
Haldenstr. 38 – CH-8142 Uitikon
Tel: +41 -1-400 42 41
Fax: +41 -1-400 42 42
Dried fruits
HILCONA AG
FL-09494 Schaan 
Tel: +41 - 75 235 95 95
Fax: +41 - 75 232 02 85
www.hilcona.ch
Vegetables, cereals, cereal products,
oil-seeds
HPW MARKETING GMBH
Laurenzenvorstadt 79
CH-5000 Aarau
Tel: +41 -62-8221515
Fax: +41 -62-8222664
Pineapples
HÜGLI NÄHRMITTEL AG
Bleichestrasse
CH-9323 Steinach
Tel: +41 - 71-4472211
Fax: +41 -71-4472994
www.huegli.com
Ready-to-serve products
IFIR HANDELS AG
Wengistrasse 7 
CH-8026 Zürich 
Schweiz
Tel: +41 - 1 297 27 62
Fax: +41 - 1 297 27 02
www.ifirtrading.com
Cereals and cereal products, 
oil-seeds, protein plants
KNOLL NATURPRODUKTEHANDEL
GMBH
Talackerstrasse 14
CH-8274 Tägerwilen
Tel: +41 -71-699 22 34 
Fax: +41 –71-669 22 34
www.kanne-brottrunk.ch
“Brottrunk”, a health drink made 
of fermented bread
MAX SCHWARZ
Hauptstr. 49 
CH-5234 Villigen 
Tel: +41 - 56 297 87 37
Fax: +41 - 56 297 87 01 
www.schwarz.ch
Transplants/Seedlings
S w i t z e r l a n d
302
ERICH MEIER FRÜCHTE + GEMÜSE
Amriswilerstrasse 36
CH-8589 Sitterdorf
Tel: +41 –71 422 15 16
Fax: +41 - 71-422 49 76
Vegetables/fruits
MORGA AG
CH-9642 Ebnat-Kappel
Tel: +41 - 71-992 60 40
Fax: +41 - 71-992 60 56
www.morga.ch
Tea, health food products, 
mushrooms, dried fruits
NARIMPEX AG
Schwanengasse 47 
CH-2501 Biel 
Tel: +41 - 32 366 62 62
+41 - 32 366 62 66
www.narimpex.ch
Honey, nuts, dried fruits
NESTLÉ SUISSE SA
Entre-Deux-Villes
CH-1800 Vevey
Tel: +41 - 21-924 31 11
Fax: +41 - 21-924 30 19
www.nestle.com
Foods for children, cocoa, 
coffee, fruits etc. 
OBIPEKTIN AG
Industriestr. 8
CH-9220 Bischofszell
Tel: +41 - 71-424 73 00
Fax: +41 - 71-424 73 90
www.obipektin.ch
Fruit extracts
PHAG SARL
abr. de prod. aliment. hygièniques régimes
a Lignière
Case postale
1196 Gland VD 
Tel: +41 - 22-364 11 18
Fax: +41 - 22-364 53 63
Health food products
PRONATEC
Stegackerstr. 6
CH-8404 Winterthur 
Tel: +41 - 52 234 09 09
Fax: +41 - 52 235 09 19
www.pronatec.com
Sugar and sweeteners (agave syrup), cocoa,
vanilla
SANBRO PRODUKTE
CH-7417 Trans
Tel: +41 - 81-6301020
Fax: +41 - 81-6301021
Sea buckthorn
SCHLÄPPI & CO.
Stationsstr. 1
CH-3076 Worb 2
Tel: +41 - 31-839 22 05
Fax: +41 - 31-839 90 45
Dried fruits
S’LOTUSBLÜEMLI
Sagmattstr. 7 – CH-4710 Balsthal
Tel: +41 - 62-391 00 80
Fax: +41 - 62-391 00 80/02
www.lotusbluemli.ch
Health food products
SOMONA GMBH
Bodenackerstr. 51
CH-4657 Dulliken
Tel: +41 - 62-295 46 46
Fax: +41 - 62-2953259
www.somona.ch
Health food products
TRAWOSA  AG
Eisenbahnstrasse 41 
CH-9401 Rorschach
Tel: +41 71 844 98 40
Fax: +41 71 844 98 49
www.trawosa.ch
UNIPEKTIN AG
Bahnhofstr. 9
CH-8264 Eschenz
Tel: +41 - 52-742 31 31
Fax: +41 - 52-742 31 32
www.unipektin.com
Concentrates
VANADIS AG
Fischingerstr. 66
CH-8370 Sirnach
Tel: +41 - 71-966 37 77
Fax: +41 - 71-966 54 21
www.vanadis.ch
Health food products
VARISTOR AG
Weststrasse 5 
CH-5426 Lengnau 
Tel: +41 - 56 266 50 60
Fax: +41 - 56 266 50 70
www.vairstor.com
Processed vegetables, dried fruit and nuts,
culinary and medicinal herbs, tea
VIA VERDE
Brunnmatt 
CH-6264 Pfaffnau 
Tel: +41 - 62 - 747 07 47
Fax: +41 - 62 - 747 07 37
www.viaverde.ch
Fresh fruit, juices, vegetables, dried fruit and
nuts, sugar, honey, wine, oil-seeds, cereals,
cereal products, culinary and medicinal herbs
W. KÜNDIG & CIE
Stampfenbachstr. 38  – P.O. Box 6784
CH-8023 Zürich 
Tel: +41 - 1 368 25 25
Fax: +41 - 1 362 84 14
www.kuendig.com
S w i t z e r l a n d
303
L i s t  o f  t r a d i n g  c o m p a n i e s ,  c e r t i f i c a t i o n  b o d i e s  a n d  a u t h o r i t i e s  b y  c o u n t r y
Cereals and cereal products, protein plants
Certification Bodies and Label
Programmes 
and Advisory Bodies
BIO INSPECTA AG
Ackerstr. – Postfach
CH-5070 Frick
Tel: +41-62-865 63 00
Fax: +41-62-865 63 01
e-mail:admin@inspecta.ch
www.bio.inspecta.ch
BIO TEST AGRO AG
Im Grutt
CH-3474 Ruedisbach BE
Tel: +41-62 968 19 77
Fax: +41-62 968 19 77
FIBL (RESEARCH INSTITUTE OF
ORGANIC AGRICULTURE)
Ackerstr. 
Postfach
CH-5070 Frick
Tel:+41- 62-865 72 72
Fax: +41-62-865 72 73
E-mail: admin@fibl.ch
www.fibl.ch
IMO (INSITUTE OF
MARKETECOLOGY)
Weststr. 51
CH-8570 Weinfelden
Tel:+41-71-626 0 630
Phone: +41-71-626 0 623
E-mail: imo@imo.ch
www.imo.ch
SIPPO (SWISS IMPORT PROMOTION
PROGRAMME)
Stampfenbachstr. 85
P.O.Box 492
CH-8035 Zürich
Tel: +41-1-365 52 00
Fax: +41-1-365 52 02
E-mail: info@sippo.ch
www.sippo.ch
SDC -  Swiss Agency for Development and
Cooperation
Freiburgstr. 130
CH-3003 Bern
Tel: +41-31-322 34 75
Fax: +41-31 324 13 48
E-mail: info@deza.admin.ch
SQS (SCHWEIZERISCHE
VEREINIGUNG FÜR QUALITÄTS- UND
MANAGEMENT-SYSTEME)
Insutriestr. 1
CH-3052 Zollikhofen
Tel: +41-31-910 35 35
Fax: +41-31 910 35 45
E-mail: headoffice@sqs.ch
www.sqs.ch
THE NETHERLANDS
Distributor, Importer, Processor
ARIZA BV
Overhorst 9
5707 PP Helmond
Tel: +31-492 528 364 
Fax: +31-492 545 151
www.ariza.com
DE TRAAY
Platinastraat 50
8211 AR Lelystad
Tel: +31-320 282 928 
Fax: +31-320 282-028
DOENS FOOD INGREDIENTS BV 
Oraniestraat 40A
Postbus 10
4515 ZG IJzendijke
Tel:  +31-117 302 020 
Fax: +31-117 301 811 
E-mail: wdtrade@zeelandnet.nl
www.doensfood.com
DO-IT BV
Prins Hendrikweg 19 
3771 AK Barneveld
Tel: +31-342 422 829 
Fax: +31-342 422 192 
E-mail: organic@euranet.nl
www.organic.nl
EOSTA BV
Postbus 132
3980 CC Bunnik
Tel: +31-30 656 6000 
Fax: +31-30 656 6040 
E-mail: info@eosta.com
www.eosta.nl
EUROHERB BV
Dynamostraat 12
3903 LK Veenendaal
Tel: +31-318 543 288 
Fax: +31-318 542 458
www.euroherb.nl
GOOD FOOD FOUNDATION 
Alike Last
Postbus 219
NL-3850 AE Ermelo
Tel: +31-341 560 210 
Fax: +31-341 562 913 
E-mail: goodfood@xsall.nl
www.goodfood.nl
GREEN, FRESH & ANYWHERE BV 
Postbus 327
2990 AH Barendrecht
TeL +31-186 668 585 
Fax: +31-186 668 588
GREENFOOD INTERNATIONAL BV
Bellstraat 7
3861 NP Nijkerk
Tel: +31-33 247 1030
Fax: +31-33 247 1035
HORIZON NATUURVOEDING BV
Postbus 77
3400 AB IJsselstein
Tel: +31-30 688 7730
Fax: +31-30 688 7142
S w i t z e r l a n d T h e  –  N e t h e r l a n d s
304
HOOFDKANTOOR NATUURVOEDINGS
WINKEL ORGANISATIE B.V. (NWO)
Postbus 193
NL-3840 AD Harderwijk
Tel: +31-341- 464294
www.denatuurwinkel.nl
MARFO
Postbus 137 
8200 AC Lelystad 
Tel:  +31-320 293 894 
Fax: +31-320 232 096 
E-mail: martinairfood@wxs.nl
NEUTEBOOM BV 
Aadijk 41
7602 PP Almelo
Tel: +31-546 864 062 
Fax: +31-546 864 062
www.neuteboom.nl
ODIN INTERNATIONAL BV 
Postbus 225
4190 CE Geldermalsen 
Tel:  +31-345 577 133 
Fax: +31-345 576 848
www.odin.nl
RENCO BV
Postbox 46 
6600 AA Wijchen 
Tel: +31-24 641 5304 
Fax: +31-24 641 5314 
E-mail: mderooij@renco.raftir.be
RHUMVELD WINTER & KONIJN BV 
Postbus 29216
3001 GE Rotterdam
Tel: +31-10 233 0900 
Fax: +31-10 233 0574
www.rhumveld.com
RIJK ZWAAN 
NEDERLAND BV 
Postbus 40
2678 ZG De Lier
Tel: +31-174 532 300 
Fax: +31-174 515 334 
E-mail: a.van.velden@rijkzaan.nl 
www.rijkzwaan.com
THE GREENERY INTERNATIONAL
Ben Linthorst
Postbus 79
NL-2990 AB Barendrecht
Tel: +31-180-655140
Fax: +31-180-655201
www.thegreenery.com
TRADIN ORGANIC 
AGRICULTURE BV 
Latexweg 12
1047 BJ Amsterdam
Tel:  +31-20 407 4499 
Fax: +31-204972100 
E-mail: postmaster@tradinorganic.com 
www.tradinorganic.com
TROUW BV
Piekstraat 63-65
3071 EL Rotterdam
Tel:  +31-10 486 6332
Fax: +31-10 4886 0928
www.trouw-buckwidge.nl
ZANN BIO-CENTER
Marconistraat 1-11
NL-3029 AE Rotterdam
Tel: +31-10-4775688
Fax: +31-10-4775070
Wholesalers, Retailer
ALBERT HEIJN
Project Organic Products 
Proviancialeweg 11 – Postbus 3000
1500 HA Zaandam
Tel:  +31-75 659 2218 
Fax: +31-75 659 8644 
E-mail: leontine.gast@corp.ah.nl
www.ah.nl
DE NIEUWE BAND
Noorderringweg 12 
9363 TC Marum
Tel: +31-594 644 3355 
Fax: +31-594 643 385
E-mail: info@nieuweband.nl
www.lekkerwijntje.nl
DE NIEUWE WEME BV 
Postbus 90 – 8440 AB Heerenveen
Tel:  +31-513 630 333 
Fax: +31-513 650 170
DE RIT NATUTIRPRODUKTEN BV 
Retsezijstraat 4 
4011 JP Zoelen 
Tel: +31-344 681 653 
Fax: +31-344 681 404
DEKAMARKT BV 
Postbus 86 – 1940 AB Beverwijk
Tel.  +31-251 276 600 
Fax: +31-251 276 680
www.dekamarkt.nl
KONMAR BV 
De Werf 13
2544 EH Den Haag
Tel: +31-70 3215121 
Fax:+31-70 329 1174
www.konmar.nl
NATUDIS BV 
Postbus 376 – 3840 AJ Harderwijk
Tel:  +31-341 464 211 
Fax: +31-341 425 704
www.naturdis.com
NWO (DE NATUURWINKEL/
GIMSEL/DE GROENE WINKEL)
Postbus 193
3840 AD Harderwijk
Tel:  +31-341 464 2 11 
Fax: +31-341 464 204 
T h e  N e t h e r l a n d s
305
L i s t  o f  t r a d i n g  c o m p a n i e s ,  c e r t i f i c a t i o n  b o d i e s  a n d  a u t h o r i t i e s  b y  c o u n t r y
E-mail: info.nl@denatuurwinkel.com
www. denatuurwinkel.com
TERRASANA NIL BV 
Postbus 70 – 2450 AB Leimuiden
Tel: +31-172 503 338 
Fax: +31-172 503 355
www.terrasana.com
UDEA BV
Postbus 478
5400 AL Uden
E-mail: jvdboogaard@ekoland.con 
www.udea.nl
VOMAR VOORDEELMARKT BV 
Postbus 217 – 1970 AE IJmuiden
Tel:  +31-255 563 700 
Fax: +31-255 521 649
www.vomar.nl
Authorities, Organizations and Certifiers
B-D ASSOCIATION (Vereniging voor
Biologisch-Dynamische Landbouw) 
Postbus 17
3970 AA Driebergen
Tel:  +31-34 353 1740 
Fax: +31-34 351 6943 
E-mail: Bd.vereniging@ecomarkt.nl 
www.ecomarkt.nt/bdvereniging
CBI  
(Centre for the Promotion 
ofImports from developing 
countries)
WTC Beursbuilding, 
5th floor
Postbus 30009
3001 DA Rotterdam
Tel:  +31-10 201 3434 
Fax: +31-10 411 4081 
E-mail: cbi@cbi.nl
www.cbi.nl
DUTCH FOOD INSPECTION SERVICE 
Ministry of Welfare, Health and
Cultural Affairs
Postbus 5840
2280 HV Rijswijk
Tel:  +31-70 340 5060 
Fax: +31-70 340 5435
FAIR TRADE ASSOCIATION 
Beesdseweg 5
Postbus 115
4100 AC Culemborg
TeL  +31-345 545 151 
Fax: +31-345 521 423
GOOD FOOD FOUNDATION 
PO Box 219
3850 AE Ermelo
Tel:  +31-341 560 210 
Fax: +31-341 562 913 
E-mail: goodfood@xs4all.nl 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
PO Box 965
6040 AZ Roermond
Tel:  +31-475 355 555 
Fax. +31-475 318 939 
SKAL
Postbus 384
8000 AJ Zwolle
Tel:  +31-38 426 8181 
Fax: +31-38 421 3063 
E-mail: SKAL@euronet.nl
www.skal.com
STICHTING BIOLOGICA -
PLATFORM BIOLOGICA 
Postbus 12048 
3501 AA Utrecht 
Tel:  +31-30 230 0713 
Fax: +31-30 230 4423 
E-mail. biologic@xs4all.nl 
www.platformbiologica.nl
STICHTING MAX HAVELAAR
Lucasbolwerk 7
3512 EG Utrecht
Tel:  +31-30 233 4602
Fax: +31-30 233 2992
E-mail: maxhavelaar@maxhavelaar.nl
www.maxhavelaar.nl
DENMARK
Importers 
BIODANIA 
A.M.B.A 
Grønttorvet 6
DK 2500 Valby
(Copenhagen)
Tel.: +45 3630 2429
Fax: +45 3630 2479
biodania@biodania.dk
www.biodania.dk
fruits and vegetables
BIO TRADING A/S
Abenravej 9
Kiskelund
6340 Krussa
Tel: +45-70 23 15 15 
Fax: +45-70 23 15 16 
E-mail bio@bio-trading.com 
www.biotrading.dk
Sugar, malt, starch, eggs, 
seeds, dried fruit and nuts, cocoa 
and chocolate, oils, spices, 
processed fruit
BLÆRE FRUGT
Kelddalvej 33
DK-9600 Års
Tel: 9866 6090
Fax: 9866 6011 
T h e  N e t h e r l a n d s  –  D e n m a r k
306
DANORGANIC A/S
Vesterbjergevej 1
DK-7280 Sdr. Felding
Tel: 9719 8899
Fax: 9719 8903
E-mail. danorganic@danorganic.dk
www.danorganic.dk 
DAGROFA A/S
Gammelager 11-13 
2605 Brondby
Tel: +45-43 22 82 82 
Fax: +45-43 22 84 04
www.dagrofa.dk
GARTNERIET MARIENLYST
Tåstrupvej 86
DK-8462 Harlev
Tel: 8694 2167
Fax: 8694 1043 
www.marienlyst.net
H. LEMBCKE A/S
Grønttorvet 244-260
PO BOX 427
DK-2500 Valby
(Copenhagen)
Tel: 3615 6222
Fax: 3615 6223 
www.lembcke.dk
HANS KJAER TRADING A/S
Piniehøj 23
DK-2960 Rungsted Kyst
Tel: 4557 1312
Fax: 4557 0048
E-mail. hanskjaer@juice.dk
(fruit juices, concentrates and 
pulp, frozen fruits)
F-I MEJERIFRUGT
Hestehaven 3
DK-5260 Odense S
Tel: 6613 1370
Fax: 6613 4410
(fruits and berries for 
the dairy industry) 
N.A.F. INTERNATIONAL AMBA
Fanøgade 15
DK-2100 Copenhagen Ø
Tel: 3916 9000
Fax: 3916 9080
E-mail. naf@naf.dk
www.naf.dk 
NATUR FRISK BREWERY
Lillehoivej 18
8600 Silkeborg
Tel: +45-86 80 37 67 
Fax: +45-86 80 24 55
Fruit juices
NUTANA A/S
Ringstedvej 531
4632 Bjaeveskov
Tel: +45-56 86 96 00 
Fax: +45-56 86 96 16
www.nutana.dk
Juices, spreads, baked beans, 
chilli beans, deep-frozen ready-meals, 
deep-frozen vegetables, muesli, 
rice, pasta, beans, seeds, grains, 
flour and fruit
SOLHJULET
Storhedevejen 32, Taul
DK-8850 Bjerringbro
Tel: 8668 6444
Fax: 8668 6275
E-mail. info@solhjulet.dk
www.solhjulet.dk 
SVANHOLM IMPORT
Svanholm Allé 2
DK-4050 Skibby
Tel: 4756 6656
Fax: 4756 6667
www.Svanholm.dk 
SØRIS I/S
Sørisvej 2A
DK-3650 Ølstykke
Tel: 4733 4003
Fax: 4733 4017
SUNPROJUICE DENMARK APS
Huginsvej 2-4 
4100 Ringsted 
Tel: +45-57 67 11 77 
Fax: +45-57 67 1145 
E-mail: sunpro@post4.tele.dk 
www.ecoweb.dk/sunprojuice
Processed fruits
SVANSØ FOOD A/S
Strandvejen 1 
5800 Nyborg 
Tel: +45-65 3141 00 
Fax: +45-65 30 10 41
Jams and marmalades, 
pasta, olive oil, 
deep-frozen fruits 
and vegetables
UNIKOST A/S
Over Hadstenvej 58 
8370 Hadsten
Tel: +45-86 98 0144 
Fax- +45-86 98 00 48 
E-mail: jan@jan-import.dk 
www.jan-import.dk
Dried fruit and nuts, 
pasta, rice, seeds, sugar, 
grains and flour
URTEKRAM A/S
Klostermarken 20 
9550 Mariager
Tel: +45-98 54 22 88 
Fax: +45-98 54 23 33 
E-mail: urtekram@inet.uni2.dk 
www.urtekram.dk
Dried fruit and nuts, 
D e n m a r k
307
L i s t  o f  t r a d i n g  c o m p a n i e s ,  c e r t i f i c a t i o n  b o d i e s  a n d  a u t h o r i t i e s  b y  c o u n t r y
herbs and spices, cereal 
products, vegetable oils, 
vinegars, tea, beans, 
lentils, sweeteners, 
wine, cosmetics
Wholesalers Retailers
DANSK SUPERMARKED A/S 
Bjodstrup 18
8270 Hojbjerg
Tel: +45-89 30 30 30 
Fax: +45-86 27 65 63
FDB  (COOP DENMARK)
Roskildevej 65
2620 Albertslund
Tel:  +45-43 86 43 86; 
Tel:  +45-43 86 48 11
Fax: +45-43 86 42 09;  
Fax: +45-43 86 33 86
E-mail: fdb@fdb.dk
www.fdb.dk
IRMA A/S
Korsdalsvej 101 
2610 Rodovre
Tel: +45-43 86 38 22 
Fax: +45-43 86 38 09
www.irma.dk
ISO SUPERMARKED
Vermlandsgade 51 
2300 Copenhagen S 
Tel: +45-31548411; 
Tel: +45-32 69 76 00 
Fax: +45-31 54 3142; 
Fax: +45-32 69 76 01
E-mail: iso@iso.dk
www.iso.dk
MATAS A/S
Rormosevej 
3450 Allerod 
Tel: +45-48 16 55 55 
Fax: +45-48 16 55 66 
www.matas.dk/OKOLOGI.HTM
NETTO I/S
Industribuen 2
DK-2635 Ishøj
Tel: 4356 8811
Fax: 4354 3288
www.netto.dk
SUPERGROS A/S
Knud Højgaards Vej 19DK-7100 Vejle
Tel: 7010 0203
Fax: 7572 3528
E-mail. Johnny_Wham@supergros.dk
www.supergros.dk 
Label Programmes and Certification
Bodies
DEMETERFORBUNDET 
(The Demeter Association)
Birkum Bygade 20
5220 Odense SO
Tel: +45-65 97 30 50
Fax: +45-65 97 30 50
DET OKOLOGISKE FODEVAREDD
(The Organic Food Council)
Strukturdirektoratet
Udvikiingskontoret
Toldbodgade 29
1253 Kobenhavn K
Tel: +45-33 63 73 00
Fax: +45-33 63 73 33
INFOOD
Langballevaenget 102
8320 Marslet
Tel +45-86 12 86 38
Fax: +45-86 12 86 37
E-mail: infood@post8.tele.dk
www.ecoweb.dkfinfood 
LANDSFORENINGEN OKOLOGISK
Jordbrug (LOJ), (The Danish Association
for Organic Farming)
Okologiens Hus
Frederiksgade 72
8000 Arhus C
Tel +45-87 32 27 00
Fax: +45-87 32 27 10
E-mail: ecojord@ecoweb.dk,
www.ecoweb.dk/oekoland
MAX HAVELAAR FONDEREN
c/o Folkekirkens Nodhjaelp
Norregade 13
1165 Copenhagen K
Tel: +45-33 11 13 45
Fax: +45-33 11 13 47
E-mail: maxhavelaar@dk,
www.maxhavelaar.dk
OGRUPPEN – DANSK
Okologileverandorforening 
Udgarden 30
Lading
8471 Sabro  
Tel: +45 86 12 77 66 
Fax: +45 86 12 77 41 
E-mail: gruppen@ecoweb.dk 
www.ecoweb.dk/gruppen/ 
Okologisk Landscenter (OLC), 
(The Danish Organic Service Centre) 
Okologiens Hus 
Frederiksgade 72 
8000 Arhus C 
Tel: +45-87 32 27 00 
Fax: +45-87 32 27 10 
E-mail: ecoinfo@ecoweb.dk 
www.ecoweb.dk/ecoinfo 
D e n m a r k
308
